                         Table of Contents


Other Works by Ralph D. Sawyer Published by Westview Press
Title Page
Dedication
Preface
A Note on the Translation and Pronunciation
Chronology of Approximate Dynastic Periods
Introduction
Introduction

Sun-tzu - The Art of War In Translation


Chapter 1 - Initial Estimations
Chapter 2 - Waging War
Chapter 3 - Planning Offensives
Chapter 4 - Military Disposition
Chapter 5 - Strategic Military Power
Chapter 6 - Vacuity and Substance
Chapter 7 - Military Combat
Chapter 8 - Nine Changes
Chapter 9 - Maneuvering the Army
Chapter 10 - Configurations of Terrain
Chapter 11 - Nine Terrains
Chapter 12 - Incendiary Attacks
Chapter 13 - Employing Spies

Tomb Texts and Lost Writings
Notes to the General Introduction and Historical Background
Notes to the Introduction
Notes to the Translation
Notes to the Tomb Texts and Lost Writings
Selected Bibliography
Glossary
Index
Copyright Page
Other Works by Ralph D. Sawyer Published by
              Westview Press

                The Complete Art of War


       The Seven Military Classics of Ancient China


                        Sun Pin
                    Military Methods


          One Hundred Unorthodox Strategies
          Battle and Tactics of Chinese Warfare


                    The Tao of Spycraft
             Intelligence Theory and Practice
                    in Traditional China


             FORTHCOMING SPRING 2003
                   The Tao of War
In memory of three who forged their own paths: John, Ralph, and Chad
                               Preface

RECENT DECADES have witnessed explosive growth in American and
European interest in the Far East. Books and articles about China have
enjoyed popularity since the 1970s; those on Japan, especially on
Japanese management practices, have proliferated since the early 1980s;
and those focusing on business in terms of “corporate warfare” and
theories of strategy, including Asian practices and their underlying
philosophies, retain currency. The writings of Musashi, the famous
Japanese swordsman, and Sun-tzu, the ancient Chinese military theorist,
have been repeatedly translated, investigated, and discussed. However,
as interesting as they and a few books from the martial arts have proven
to be, the vast Chinese military corpus—despite its historical importance
and contemporary significance—remains unknown in the West.
   Chinese military thought probably originated with neolithic village
conflicts four or five thousand years ago, perhaps even as mythologized
in the clash of legendary cultural heroes and Sage Emperors.
Subsequently, because men were compelled to direct their ingenuity
toward combat, weapons were developed, tactics evolved, and power
structures arose. Eventually, dominant figures—perhaps clan or lineage
chiefs commanding more-warlike peoples—imposed their wills over
other groups and widening domains and some groups became significant
political powers. At the dawn of the historical age, as preserved in early
written materials and revealed by artifacts, frequent, intense clashes were
already occurring between these contending forces as they evolved into
states and as powerful individuals sought to establish sole rule over the
realm and to found dynastic houses. Thereafter the scope of battle
expanded; the strength and effectiveness of weapons increased; and
military organization, tactics, and technology all developed. Eventually,
battlefield lessons and command experience became the focus of
conscious study; efforts were made to preserve the insights and avoid the
errors of the past; and the science of military tactics and strategy was
born.
  By the second century B.C. China had already passed through a
thousand years of almost unremitting conflict and had been brutally
unified into a vast, powerful, imperially directed entity. Along the way,
skilled commanders appeared, and major battles were fought. Campaigns
became interminable, and the scale of destruction was immense,
consuming both men and the thoughts they had committed to writing.
However, among the small number of military writings that survived
until unification, there were six major ones, including Sun-tzu’s famous
Art of War. They continued to be studied and transmitted down through
the centuries until the remnants were collected and edited in the Sung
dynasty around twelve hundred years later. Combined with a T’ang
dynasty work, they compose the Seven Military Classics, a compilation
that comprised the orthodox foundations for military thought and the
basis for the imperial examinations required for martial appointment.
   In the early 1970s, archaeologists excavating the Han dynasty tomb of
a high-ranking official discovered a large number of immensely valuable
texts written on remarkably well preserved bamboo slips. The military
works among them include major portions of several of the Seven
Military Classics, including the Art of War and extensive fragments of
Sun Pin’s Military Methods. Although this last book—by Sun-tzu’s
descendant—appeared in the bibliographic listings compiled in the Han
dynasty, it had apparently vanished in the Han and been lost for over two
thousand years. This important find thus increased the total extant
military materials from the ancient period to eight classic works in all,
supplemented by a few hundred other writings of various, but definitely
later, dates.
   Even though tactical studies continued to be written throughout
Chinese history, much of the vast military corpus has undoubtedly been
lost over the centuries through carelessness, natural disasters, deliberate
destruction, and warfare. However, ancient epigraphic materials and such
early historical records as the Tso chuan and Shih chi also chronicle the
exploits of generals and kings; the Twenty-five Histories preserves
extensive information about men and actions; and Warring States
philosophical works contain discussions of military issues. Thus
resources abound, but only a part of the historical writings, including the
complete Tso chuan, and essentially two of the Seven Military Classics
(Sun-tzu’s Art of War—three major versions, several minor ones—and
the Wu-tzu—which appears as an appendix to Griffith’s translation) have
been translated and published.
   Far from having vanished and being forgotten, these ancient Chinese
military works have extensively influenced twentieth-century thought
and are experiencing a new vitality in Asia. Not only in the military
realm—throughout the century they have been thoroughly studied in
Japan and China—do they continue to be discussed, but also in the
business and personal spheres their resurgence is particularly evident. In
the 1980s a management book that revived Sun-tzu’s thought and
employed the revitalized figures of several ancient martial heroes to
instruct companies in the basics of business and marketing became a
bestseller in the draconian Communist environment of the People’s
Republic of China and eventually in capitalist Hong Kong as well.
Japanese companies have regularly held study groups to seek insights
from the Art of War that may be implemented as corporate strategy.
Koreans, enduring intense international pressure to revalue their
currency, open their markets, and submit to trade limitations just when
prosperity is attainable, are discovering strategies for international
business warfare in these books.
   In Taiwan, where companies confront a situation similar to Korea’s,
books applying the thoughts of the ancient strategists to life, business,
sports, and the stock market have suddenly surged in popularity, even
though modernists have ignored and scorned them for decades. Perhaps
more astounding is the penchant of Japanese writers to apply principles
and tactics from the Seven Military Classics to all the complexities of
modern society; they use such tactics, for example, for succesful human
relations, romantic liaisons, and company infighting. In addition to at
least one scholarly translation, several new paperbacks offering
simplified renditions and popularized expansions of selected teachings
are published annually in Japan. The ubiquitous salaryman may be seen
reading them while commuting to work, and there are even comic-book
editions of the Art of War and novels about Sun-tzu to satisfy those so
inclined. Naturally, tactics from the classics also frequently appear in
novels, movies, and on television, and their words are quoted in
contemporary media throughout Asia. However, in every sphere, Sun-
tzu’s Art of War predominates, eclipsing all the other military writings
combined.
  ...
   There is a great temptation, given the extensive materials rapidly
becoming available from diverse sources, to undertake a truly
comprehensive introduction to the entire military enterprise in Ancient
China. Many topics critical to understanding strategy, tactics, and the
evolution of military thought merit exploration and analysis. However,
we have consciously focused upon depicting the historical context and
reviewing the essential material aspects, such as armor and weapons,
rather than ineffectually sketching comprehensive intellectual issues.
Although we have not totally neglected the latter, exploring topics such
as the relationships of Taoism and military thought in at least cursory
fashion in the introductions and the extensive notes, these areas must
largely be consigned to another work and to expert monographs.
Similarly, although we have outlined the essentials of Sun-tzu’s
concepts, such as unorthodox /orthodox, we have not analyzed them in
depth, nor have we discussed the details of technology; concrete tactics
of deployment; or the implementation of strategy beyond that found in
the Art of War, supplemented by the historical records of Sun-tzu’s era—
the Shih chi, Tso chuan, and Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu. Furthermore, except
in an occasional note, we have not explored the relationship of the Art of
War to the Kuan-tzu, the Book of Lord Shang, or other Warring States
philosophical writings that prominently espouse military policies,
administrative measures, and strategic concepts. These and many other
topics, including the systematic analysis and integration of ideas and
methods and their interrelationship in each of the classics, require
extensive studies in themselves. Because their inclusion would be
premature and would probably detract from the core teaching of the Art
of War, we will focus upon them in a future work integrating the
interactive development of military technology and tactical thought.
   Because this book is intended for the general reader, a rubric we
assume encompasses everyone except those few specialists in ancient
Chinese studies with expertise in the previously neglected military
writings, we have provided somewhat fuller notes on many general
aspects than might otherwise be necessary. Overall the notes have been
designed for several different audiences; although much of the
translation cries out for detailed annotation, in order to minimize the
number of notes, we have refrained from exploring deeply every thought,
concept, and strategy. Many of the notes simply provide contextual
information or identify figures and terms for the convenience of readers
unfamiliar with Chinese history and writings. Others are intended for
those students of Asia—professional or not—who might benefit from
further historical, technical, or military information or from the citation
of certain seminal articles. Many notes comment upon the intricacies of
translation matters: They provide alternative readings; note emendations
we have accepted and commentaries followed; discuss the relevant
fragments from the tomb text when differences exist; and sometimes
indicate where we have relied upon our own judgment contrary to
traditional readings. Finally, some amplify those portions of the
introductory material where we sought to avoid dogmatic assertions
about the numerous issues, such as textual authenticity, that have only
tentatively been resolved or remain the subject of scholarly controversy.
Every reader is encouraged to peruse them all, at least briefly, focusing
upon those of greatest relevance in the quest to understand these texts.
   Full bibliographic information is provided for each work at its first
appearance in each chapter, with abbreviated titles thereafter.
Consequently, for the bibliography we have departed from the usual
format and instead provided a selected listing by subject for those who
might wish to investigate the literature on a single topic. Numerous
books with only tangential connections with the Seven Military Classics
and solely of interest to specialists have been excluded. For matters of
general knowledge that have not been annotated, the reader should
consult the Western-language works listed in the bibliography for further
reading.
  ***
   A work of this scope, in our case undertaken enthusiastically without
fully realizing the many thorny issues it would entail, is necessarily the
product of years of reading, study, pondering, sifting, and effort. We have
benefited vastly from the commentaries and essays of a hundred
generations of Chinese scholars and from the growth of detailed
knowledge deriving from the work of Western and Asian scholars in the
present century. However, having left the academic community two
decades ago, we have enjoyed a rather different, vibrant perspective on
these ideas and philosophies—the result of twenty-five years of technical
and business consulting at all levels in Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea,
Hong Kong, Singapore, and Southeast Asia. For a startling number of
our Asian associates, the various military classics—especially the Art of
War—remain compendiums of effective tactics and strategies, providing
approaches and measures that can be profitably adopted in life and
employed in business practices. Their discussions and understanding of
many of the concrete lessons, although not necessary orthodox or
classically based, stimulated our own enlightenment on many issues. In
particular, conversations over the decades in Asia with Guy Baer, Cleon
Brewer, Ma Shang-jen, Kong Jung-yul, Professor W. K. Seong,
Professor Ts’ai Mao-t’ang, and especially C. S. Shim have been both
stimulating and illuminating.
   Certain early teachers had a lasting influence on my approach to
Chinese intellectual history. In particular, as a graduate student at
Harvard in the turbulent 1960s I was greatly influenced by Professors
Yang Lien-sheng, Yü Ying-shih, Benjamin Schwartz, and especially Dr.
Achilles Fang, under whom I was privileged to be thrust into the true
study of classical Chinese. Thereafter I was fortunate to read
intermittently for more than a decade with Professor Chin Chia-hsi, a
Chuang-tzu specialist and university professor of Chinese at National
Taiwan University. However, my greatest intellectual debt is to Professor
Nathan Sivin, initially a Sage at M.I.T.; a friend for more than twenty-
five years; and ultimately responsible for both illuminating the Way and
making the path accessible. However, these are all general intellectual
obligations, not specific, for these scholars have not seen any portion of
this work, and the survivors from Harvard would perhaps be astonished
to learn that I have been carrying on the Chinese tradition of private
scholarship over these many years.
   Whereas I am responsible for the translations, introductions, and
notes, Mei-chün Lee (Sawyer) has not only been an active participant in
our discussions and studies over the years but also undertook numerous
burdens associated with the detailed research of such historical issues as
the evolution of weapons. She also contributed immeasurably through
her insightful readings of the translations and the tedious investigation
and comparison of various modern commentaries. Her collaborative
efforts greatly aided my understanding of many issues and improved the
overall work significantly, all while she continued to fulfill her
responsibilities in our consulting operations.
  Finally we would like to thank Westview Press, in particular, Peter
Kracht, senior editor, for his efforts on the original edition of the Seven
Military Classics, on which this edition of the Art of War is based. We
benefited greatly from Westview’s editorial support and from the
intensive, detailed reading of the translation provided through their
auspices by Professor Robin D. S. Yates. Many of his numerous
emendations and general suggestions substantially improved the work,
and all his criticisms stimulated a careful reexamination of the text and
many additional materials; nevertheless, final responsibility for their
evaluation and integration, where accepted, remains with the translators.
  Others who assisted, especially in locating articles and textual
materials in the United States and Asia, include Miao Yong-i, Marta
Hanson, Yuriko Baer, Anton Stetzko, and Zhao Yong; Lorrie Stetzko
provided expertise on horses and the intricacies of riding; Westview
Press and Max Gartenberg essentially made the project possible. We
express our deep appreciation to all these people and to Lee T’ing-jung,
who has honored the work with his calligraphy.
Ralph D. Sawyer
  A Note on the Translation and Pronunciation

THE TRANSLATION IS based upon and rigorously follows the so-
called Ming edition of the (Sung dynasty) Seven Military Classics, which
contains and benefits from Liu Yin’s consistent commentary—the chih-
chieh, or “direct explanations”—throughout all seven books. However,
although many of his comments are illuminating and even critical to
understanding the actual text, scholarship continued to advance, and over
the centuries, a few valuable commentaries and several variant editions
that have furthered the process of understanding—particularly of the Art
of War—have come out. Where the Ming text appears obviously
defective, recourse for emendation is made first to the Sung edition and
then to other variants. Full information on the individual variants
employed is given in the introduction and the notes for each book, and
the basic editions are listed in the bibliography.
   We have sought to employ contemporary scholarship judiciously,
irrespective of its political perspective, and to integrate insights provided
by archaeological discoveries. The discovery of early versions, although
dramatic and invaluable, precipitates the problem about which text to
translate: the “original” versions, which entail numerous problems of
their own, or the Sung Seven Military Classics edition, which has been
historically available and influential for nine centuries. Because the
newly recovered tomb text, even when supplemented by additional
fragments that may well have been part of the Art of War or from Sun-
tzu’s hand (or school), is only partial, while the book that is read and
known throughout Asia remains the traditional text, we have chosen to
translate the traditionally received version. Accordingly, we have used
the newly recovered textual materials to make emendations only where
they resolve highly problematic or completely incomprehensible
passages, and to supplement passages where clearly integral to the topic.
In addition, we have provided translations of the relevant, important
tomb materials in a supplementary section, together with the highly
illuminating nine passages on “configurations of terrain” separately
preserved in the T’ung tien.
   In providing a translation for a general readership, rather than a
somewhat more literal (and some would claim precise) version for
sinologists, we hope to emulate the vibrant translations of Professor
Burton Watson and thereby make this amazing text accessible to the
widest possible audience. We have thus avoided military jargon because,
apart from the thorny question about each term’s appropriateness, such
terms would render the translation less comprehensible to anyone
lacking military experience or unacquainted with military history.
   Unfortunately, neither of the two commonly employed orthographies
makes the pronunciation of romanized Chinese characters easy. Each
system has its stumbling blocks and we remain unconvinced that the
Pinyin qi is inherently more comprehensible than the Wade-Giles ch’i,
although it is certainly no less comprehensible than j for r in Wade-Giles.
However, as many of the important terms may already be familiar to
Western readers and previous translations have employed Wade-Giles,
we have opted to use that system throughout our work. Well-known
cities, names, and books—such as Peking—are retained in their common
form, and books and articles published with romanized names and titles
also appear in their original form.
   As a guide to pronunciation, we offer the following notes on the
significant exceptions to normally expected sounds:
       t, as in Tao: without apostrophe, pronounced like d
       p, as in ping: without apostrophe, pronounced like b
       ch, as in chuang: without apostrophe, pronounced like j
       hs, as in hsi: prounounced sh
       j, as in jen: pronounced like r
  Thus, the name of the famous Chou dynasty is pronounced as if
written “jou” and sounds just like the English name “Joe.”
Chronology of Approximate Dynastic Periods


              Dynastic Period        Years

       Legendary Sage Emperors   2852-2255 B.C.

       Hsia                      2205-1766

       Shang                     1766-1045

       Chou:                     1045-256

       Western Chou              1045-770

       Eastern Chou              770-256

         Spring and Autumn       722-481

         Warring States          403-221

       Ch’in                     221-207

       Former Han                206 B.C.-8 A.D.

       Later Han                 23-220

       Six Dynasties             222-589

       Sui                       589-618

       T’ang                     618-907

       Five Dynasties            907-959

       Sung                      960-1126

       Southern Sung             1127-1279

       Yüan (Mongol)             1279-1368
Ming              1368-1644

Ch’ing (Manchu)   1644-1911
         General Introduction and Historical
                    Background

MILITARY THOUGHT, the complex product of both violent war and
intellectual analysis, suffered from disparagement and disrepute during
almost all the past two millennia in Imperial China. Ignoring the original
teachings of Confucius, self-styled Confucians eschewed—whether
sincerely or hypocritically—the profession of arms and all aspects of
military involvement from the Han dynasty on, growing more vociferous
in their condemnation with the passing of centuries.1 However,
regardless of these people’s civilized and cultured self-perception, the
nation could not be without armies or generals, particularly in the face of
constant “barbarian” threats and ongoing conflicts with volatile nomadic
peoples. Accordingly, a number of early military treatises continued to
be valued and studied and thereby managed to survive, while the turmoil
of frequent crises inevitably fostered generations of professional military
figures and additional strategic studies. Yet compared to the Confucian
classics and various other orthodox writings, the military corpus
remained minuscule, numbering at most a few hundred works.
   Individual chapters of several writings by influential philosophers of
the Warring States period (403-221 B.C.),2 such as Lord Shang, also
focused upon military matters, often with radical impact.3 Many famous
thinkers, including Hsün-tzu and Han Fei-tzu,4 pondered the major
questions of government administration and military organization;
motivation and training; the nature of courage; and the establishment of
policies to stimulate the state’s material prosperity. The Tso chuan and
other historical writings similarly record the thoughts of many key
administrators and preserve the outlines of famous strategies, although
their presentation of battlefield tactics is minimal.
  A number of the ancient strategic monographs became relatively
famous, and scholars in the Sung Period (circa A.D. 1078) collected,
edited, and assembled the six important survivors, augmenting them with
a T’ang dynasty book; the final product was the Seven Military Classics.
Thus codified, the seven works thereafter furnished the official textual
foundation for government examinations in military affairs and
concurrently provided a common ground for tactical and strategic
conceptualization.
   Despite incessant barbarian incursions and major military threats
throughout its history, Imperial China was little inclined to pursue
military solutions to aggression—except during the ill-fated
expansionistic policies of the Former Han dynasty, or under dynamic
young rulers, such as T’ang T’aitsung, during the founding years of a
dynasty. Rulers and ministers preferred to believe in the myth of cultural
attraction whereby their vastly superior Chinese civilization, founded
upon Virtue5 and reinforced by opulent material achievements, would
simply overwhelm the hostile tendencies of the uncultured. Frequent
gifts of the embellishments of civilized life, coupled with music and
women, it was felt, would distract and enervate even the most warlike
peoples. If they could not be either overawed into submission or bribed
into compliance, other mounted nomadic tribes could be employed
against the troublemakers, following the time-honored tradition of “using
barbarian against barbarian.”6
   According to Confucian thought, which became the orthodox
philosophy and prescribed state view in the Former Han, the ruler need
only cultivate his Virtue, accord with the seasons, and implement
benevolent policies in order to be successful in attracting universal
support and fostering stability. Naturally, there were dissenting views,
and even Mencius (371-289 B.C.), the second great Confucian,
advocated punitive military expeditions to chastise evil rulers and relieve
the people’s suffering. However, except under rulers such as Sui Yang-ti
(reigned A.D. 605-617), who sought to impose Chinese suzerainty on
external regions—and thereby impoverished the nation—military affairs
were pressed unwillingly; most of the bureaucracy tended to disdain
anything associated with the military and the profession of arms.


          Evolution of Conflict and Weapons in China


                             THE SHANG
   Over the centuries Chinese military thought mirrored the evolution in
weapons, economic conditions, and political power while creating the
framework for strategic conceptualization and stimulating the
development of battlefield methods. Tactics appropriate to the dawn of
the historical Shang period changed in response to increased manpower,
greater speed and mobility, and the invention of more-powerful shock
and missile weapons. However, a critical kernel of thought that focused
on basic questions, including organization, discipline, evaluation,
objectives, and fundamental principles, retained its validity and
continued to be applied until the Ch’in eventually conquered and unified
the empire, thereby signifying the end of the Warring States period.
   The Shang dynasty was a theocratic state whose power arose initially
from, and continued to depend upon, the military skills of the nobility, in
conjunction with its religious beliefs and institutions.7 The populace was
effectively divided into four classes: ruling families; royal clan members,
many of whom were enfeoffed or served as officials, and other members
of the nobility; common people, who were essentially serfs; and slaves.8
The king exercised great power over a central area and enjoyed the
allegiance of various lords in the peripheral territory. The nobility, which
was educated and cultured, lived in well-organized cities marked by
massive complex buildings, such as palaces and temples.9 The common
people, who dwelled in semi-earthen huts, farmed or practiced various
specialized crafts during most of the year, although they were also
required to provide conscript labor and even to mobilize to assist military
campaigns.
   Bronze technology advanced rapidly from the official inception of the
Shang (traditionally dated as 1766 B.C., when T’ang I mounted his
victorious campaign over the Hsia) until its collapse at the hands of the
Chou, about 1045 B.C.10 Intricately detailed ritual vessels, essential to
the ancestor worship that underlay the king’s power, provide dramatic
evidence of the technological achievements and the government’s
effective management and monopoly of productive resources.11
Although the weapons for the nobility were fashioned primarily from
bronze, the raw materials for agricultural implements and the arms
carried by the commoners were largely confined to stone, wood, and
animal bones.12 Millet and, later, wheat, were the staple crops, and they
were stored in centralized granaries after harvesting. Rice was known,
but it remained an expensive luxury even for the ruler because it was
cultivated mainly in the south.13 The level of material culture had
progressed sufficiently to sustain cities with large populations based
upon organized farming and systematic exploitation of the hunt. Some
animals—such as sheep, oxen, pigs, and dogs—had been
domesticated,14 and both silk and hemp were produced. Vessels for
ordinary use were made of pottery, which was marked by intricate
designs.
   Prior to the Shang dynasty, armed conflict essentially consisted of
raids by and engagements between neolithic villages, although certain
clan chiefs apparently developed local power bases and some regional
strongmen emerged, such as those who founded the Hsia dynasty.
However, with the rise of the Shang and the imposition of significant
central authority (although not administration), a royal standing army of
about a thousand was maintained. The number could be expanded as
needed: The subservient lineage chiefs and state rulers would be ordered
to furnish supporting armies. Although the king normally commanded in
person, a rudimentary military bureaucracy with specialized officials
already existed.15 A royal campaign against border enemies might
require three thousand to five thousand men, and a campaign directed
toward an insolent state as many as thirteen thousand.16 Military actions
required from a few days to perhaps three months; the actual battles
generally were settled in a single confrontation, although engagements
lasting several days have also been recorded.17 The army was divided
into three sections—left, right, and middle18—formed from two types of
units: loosely organized infantry, conscripted from the privileged
populace,19 which acted in a supporting role; and chariots, manned by
the nobles fulfilling their martial responsibilities as warriors and
sustainers of the state.
   Shang warfare objectives included the imposition or reinforcement of
royal suzerainty, the mass capture of prisoners, and the seizure of
riches.20 Control over areas outside the central core continued to be
imposed through a vassal-like network, rather than through integration
under a centrally administered bureaucracy. Plunder increased the wealth
of the royal house and also furnished the means to reward loyal service.
Some prisoners were enslaved and forced to work in either agricultural
or domestic tasks, but large numbers were sacrificed as part of Shang
religious ceremonies.21
   During the several hundred years of Shang rule, bronze weapons
formed an integral part of every Shang warrior’s arsenal. 22 The
preferred weapon was the ko (halberd, or dagger-ax), 23 supplemented
by spears24 and the compound bow.25 Bronze-tipped arrows, propelled
by reflex bows whose pull may have reached 160 pounds, provided
effective action at a distance. Daggers and hatchets were available for
close fighting; leather armor and large shields—the latter used in
coordinated fighting tactics—offered considerable protection against
shock weapons and projectiles.26 Bronze helmets were fabricated to
deflect missiles and glancing blows, and thin bronze plates were affixed
as outer protection on both armor and shields. According to Warring
States theory, weapons were usually of mixed type, providing the means
for both aggressive and defensive action at close and long ranges.
However the sword evolved slowly, apparently from daggers or perhaps
the dagger-ax, and true swords did not become common until the middle
of the Warring States period.27
   The chariot functioned as the basic fighting unit during the late Shang,
Western Chou, and Spring and Autumn (722-481 B.C.) periods; it
remained important until well into the Warring States (403-221), when it
was gradually supplanted by large infantry masses and eventually, during
the third century B.C., began to be supplemented by the cavalry. Chinese
tradition portrays the Shang as having employed seventy chariots during
the campaign of rectification to oust the evil Hsia dynasty. 28 However,
twentieth-century archaeological discoveries, supplemented by textual
research, indicate that the chariot, rather than being an indigenous
development, did not reach China from Central Asia until the middle of
the Shang dynasty—approximately 1300 to 1200 B.C.29 Initially, the use
of chariots was probably confined to ceremonies and transportation and
only gradually was expanded to the hunt and eventually to warfare.
Epigraphic materials provide evidence that the Shang relied upon
infantry units of nobility to confront their enemies even after the
integration of the chariot into their military organization. In fact,
throughout the Shang, the chariot may have remained a prestige symbol;
its function during military engagements was restricted to providing
transport mobility and serving as a command platform rather than
constituting a significant military weapon.
   The chariots of the late Shang and subsequent Chou periods normally
carried three men: the driver in the center, the archer on the left, and a
warrior with a dagger-ax on the right. Five chariots constituted a squad,
the basic functional unit, and five squads composed a brigade. Each
chariot had a complement of 10 to 25 close-supporting infantry, with an
additional vanguard of perhaps 125 men in later times.30 A Shang team
consisted of two horses, and the rectangular chariot rode on two sturdy,
multispoked wheels. Training for warfare included large-scale royal
hunts that utilized chariots, although given the difficulty of developing
driving skills and the fighting expertise appropriate to a racing chariot,
far more practice must have been necessary.31 It was an expensive
weapon that required craftsmen to build and maintain; thus its use was
confined to the nobility, minimally supported by conscripted commoners.
Battles accordingly resolved into a number of individual clashes, with
personal combat supposedly governed by appropriate ceremonial
constraints (probably a later romanticization). A few scholars have seen
references to hunting on horseback in certain sentences, but these claims
are generally discounted: The horse was employed only in conjunction
with the chariot. Lacking stirrups and a saddle and hampered by his long
robes, the mounted rider could not become an effective military element
until the the third century B.C.


                             THE CHOU

  The Chou came to power by overthrowing the Shang in a decisive
battle at Mu-yeh after many years of stealthy preparation and the gradual
expansion of their power base through carefully wrought alliances, the
submission of some smaller states, and the subjugation of other clans and
peoples. Possibly descendants of the Hsia,32 the Chou originally dwelled
to the north but had been forced south into the Wei River valley by more-
aggressive peoples.33 As the Chou were situated on the periphery of
Shang culture, they were able to assimilate many of the material and
cultural achievements of Shang civilization in relative freedom while
successfully developing a strong agricultural base, indigenous
technology, and their own cultural identity. External barbarian pressures
stimulated their military skills, organizational abilities, and tactical
thought simultaneously, and the Shang even entrusted them with the task
of subjugating rebellious peoples in the west, which allowed the Chou to
increase their military prowess.34 When they mounted their final
campaign against the debauched, enervated Shang, the Chou’s weapons
and implements were similar to the Shang’s. Perhaps the only Chou
innovation was the extensive employment of chariots, facilitating more-
rapid movement and the conveying of greater quantities of weapons and
supplies. 35 The Chou’s victory probably stemmed in large part not only
from the Shang’s disorganization but also from the exhaustion suffered
by the Shang in fighting off hostile nomadic peoples to the north and east
and from their large-scale commitment to a southern military expedition
at the moment of attack.36
   The Chou’s overall campaign and tactics (particularly if the Book of
Documents and the Six Secret Teachings preserve any reliable material)
approached the conflict from a new perspective—abandoning ritualistic,
formal combat for effective revolutionary activity.37 Attaining the
objective of dynastic revolution required perfecting themselves in the
measures and technologies of the time and systematically developing
policies, strategies, and even battlefield tactics not previously witnessed
in Chinese history. The Chou kings were compelled to ponder employing
limited resources and restricted forces to attack a vastly superior, well-
entrenched foe whose campaign armies alone probably outnumbered the
entire Chou population. In short, they had to create a substantial power
base and attract the allegiance of other peoples and states just to create
the possibility of militarily confronting the Shang.
   The epoch-making clash between the Chou and Shang dynasties, as
envisioned by the Chou and idealistically portrayed in later historical
writings, set the moral tone and established the parameters for the
dynastic cycle concept. The archetypal battle of virtue and evil—the
benevolent and righteous acting on behalf of all the people against a
tyrant and his coterie of parasitic supporters—had its origin with this
conflict. The Shang’s earlier conquest of the Hsia, although portrayed as
having been similarly conceived, occurred before the advent of written
language and was only a legend even in antiquity. However, the Chou’s
determined effort to free the realm from the yoke of suffering and
establish a rule of Virtue and benevolence became the inspirational
essence of China’s moral self-perception. As dynasties decayed and
rulers became morally corrupt and increasingly ineffectual, new
champions of righteousness appeared who confronted the oppressive
forces of government, rescued the people from imminent doom, and
returned the state to benevolent policies. Moreover, in the view of some
historians, the Shang-Chou conflict marked the last battle between
different peoples because starting with the Chou dynasty, military
engagements within China were essentially internal political clashes.38
However, confrontations between inhabitants of the agrarian central
states and the nomadic steppe peoples continued throughout Chinese
history, reflecting in part the self-conscious identity emphasized by the
people of the central states in contrast with their “barbarian” neighbors.

  As portrayed in such historical writings as the Shih chi,39 and in
accord with good moral tradition and the plight of the people, the Shang
had ascended to power by overthrowing the last evil ruler of the previous
dynasty—the Hsia.40 After generations of rule, the Shang emperors—
due perhaps to their splendid isolation and constant indulgence in myriad
pleasures—are believed to have become less virtuous and less capable.41
Their moral decline continued inexorably until the final ruler, who
history has depicted as evil incarnate. The many perversities attributed to
him included imposing heavy taxes; forcing the people to perform
onerous labor services, mainly to provide him with lavish palaces and
pleasure centers; interfering with agricultural practices, thereby causing
widespread hunger and deprivation; indulging in debauchery, including
drunkenness, orgies, and violence; brutally murdering innumerable
people, especially famous men of virtue and loyal court officials; and
developing and inflicting inhuman punishments. However, as the
following brief excerpt from the Shang Annals in the Shih chi records,
the king was also talented, powerful, and fearsome:
       In natural ability and discrimination Emperor Chou was acute
       and quick; his hearing and sight were extremely sensitive; and his
       physical skills and strength surpassed other men. His hands could
       slay a fierce animal; his knowledge was sufficient to ward off
       criticism; and his verbal skills [were] sufficient to adorn his
       errors. He boasted to his ministers about his own ability; he was
       haughty to all the realm with his reputation; and [he] believed
       that all were below him. He loved wine, debauched himself in
       music, and was enamored of his consorts. He loved Ta Chi, and
       followed her words.42 Thus he had Shih Chüan create new
       licentious sounds, the Pei-li dance [of licentious women], and the
       [lewd] music of “fluttering down.” He made the taxes heavier in
       order to fill the Deer Tower with coins, and stuffed the Chü-
       ch’iao storehouses with grain. He increased his collections of
       dogs, horses, and unusual objects, overflowing the palace
       buildings. He expanded the Sha-ch’iu garden tower, and had a
       multitude of wild animals and flying birds brought there. He was
       disrespectful to ghosts and spirits. He assembled numerous
       musicians and actors at the Sha-ch’iu garden; [he] made a lake of
       wine and a forest of hanging meat, and had naked men and
       women pursue each other in them, conducting a drinking feast
       throughout the night. The hundred surnames looked toward him
       with hatred, and some of the feudal lords revolted.43
   According to traditional sources, the Chou state was dramatically
established when Tan Fu, the Chou leader, emigrated over the mountains
south into the Wei River valley to avoid endangering his people and
subsequently abandoned so-called barbarian customs to embrace the
agricultural destiny of his ancestors. These actions immediately
characterized him as a paragon of Virtue and endowed the Chou—and
subsequently China—with a sedentary, agrarian character. The Shih chi
records it as follows:
       The Ancient Duke, Tan Fu, again cultivated the [agricultural]
       occupation of Hou Chi44 and Duke Liu, accumulated his Virtue
       and practiced righteousness, and the people of the state all
       supported him. The Hsün-yü of the Jung and Ti [barbarians]
       attacked them, wanting to get their wealth and things, so he gave
       them to them. After that they again attacked, wanting to take the
       land and people. The people were all angry and wanted to fight.
       The Ancient Duke said, “When people establish a ruler, it should
       be to their advantage. Now the barbarians are attacking and
       waging war because they want my land and people. What
       difference is there if the people are with them, or with me? The
       people want to fight because of me, but to slay people’s fathers
       and sons in order to rule them, I cannot bear to do it.” Then, with
       his relatives, he went to Pin, forded the Ch’i River, the Chü
       River, crossed over Mt. Liang, and stopped below Mt. Ch’i. The
       people of Pin, supporting their aged and carrying their weak,
       again all flocked to the Ancient Duke below Mt. Ch’i. When the
       nearby states heard of the Ancient Duke’s benevolence, many
       also gave their allegiance. Thereupon the Ancient Duke discarded
       their barbarian customs, constructed walls and buildings, and
       established cities to have them dwell separately. He set up
       officials for the five offices. The people all sang songs and took
       pleasure in it, praising his Virtue.45
General Hsü Pei-ken, a twentieth-century Chinese military historian,
believes the Chou easily managed to develop alliances with various
peoples—including disenchanted Hsia groups conquered by the Shang—
because of their agricultural heritage and specialization. In perpetuating
the Hsia’s agricultural offices, for many years the Chou had dispatched
advisers to instruct other people and states in farming practices and
seasonal activities. This not only garnered them respect and goodwill but
also gave them an opportunity to gain a thorough knowledge of the
inhabitants, customs, and terrain outside the Wei River valley.46
   However, Chi Li—Tan Fu’s third son and heir through the virtuous
deference of his two elder brothers—aggressively waged successful
campaigns against neighboring peoples and rapidly expanded the Chou’s
power base. At first the Shang recognized his achievements and
sanctioned his actions, granting him the title of earl, but he was
eventually imprisoned and died at Shang hands despite having married
into their royal house. Although the history of Shang-Chou relations
remains somewhat unclear, awaiting further archaeological discoveries,
several other members of the Chou royal house—including King Wen—
seem to have married Shang princesses. Generations before the Chou
had migrated into the Wei River valley, commencing with King Wu
Ting, the Shang had conducted several military expeditions to subjugate
the Chou. Shang kings had also frequently hunted in the Chou domain
but apparently grew apprehensive and abandoned this practice as Chou’s
might increased.47
   In his old age, King Wen was also imprisoned by the tyrannical Shang
ruler for his loyal remonstrance, but he gained his freedom through
lavish bribes gathered by his family and other virtuous men.48 The gifts
presented were so generous and impressive that King Wen, who
continued to profess his submission and fealty to the Shang, was even
designated the Western Duke, or Lord of the West. When the title was
conferred, he was presented with a bow, arrows, and axes—symbols of
the attendant military responsibilities that ironically required that he
actively protect the empire from external challenges. He immediately
returned to his small state on the western fringe of the Shang empire
where the remoteness of the Wei River valley proved immensely
advantageous. Dwelling in essentially barbarian territory, the people
enjoyed the stimulus of vigorous military activity,49 the harvests of a
fertile area, and the secrecy that relative isolation allowed. Because King
Wen could implement effective policies to foster the state’s material and
social strength without attracting undue attention, Chou had the luxury of
seventeen years to prepare for the ultimate confrontation.50


     THE SIX SECRET TEACHINGS AND THE CHOU
                    CONQUEST

Three famous individuals have historically been identified with the
Chou’s ascent and conquest of the Shang: King Wen, King Wu, and the
T’ai Kung. King Wen, who ruled for decades, nurtured the state’s power,
implemented strong economic policies to foster the people’s welfare, and
fashioned a strong reputation for Virtue. King Wu, who succeeded him
just years before the dynastic revolution, completed the Chou’s
preparations by expanding their alliances, subjugating potential enemies,
and forging the armed forces, thereafter undertaking the final military
campaign. The T’ai Kung, whose historical authenticity—like Sun-tzu’s
—is frequently questioned, has been honored throughout Chinese history
as the first general and the true progenitor of strategic thought.51 After
meeting King Wen in a “predestined” encounter, he reportedly served as
advisor, teacher, confidant, Sage, strategist, and military commander for
the twenty years necessary before final victory could be attained.
   The Six Secret Teachings, one of the Seven Military Classics, is said to
contain the T’ai Kung’s political and tactical instructions to Kings Wen
and Wu, preserving his measures for effective state control, attaining
national prosperity, and waging psychological warfare. However, much
of the work is devoted to analyzing tactical situations and suggesting
appropriate concrete measures. These are particularly important to the
study of Chinese military strategy, generally being viewed as expanded
discourses upon the configurations of terrain first raised by Sun-tzu in
the Art of War and possibly Wu Ch’i in the Wu-tzu. Although the extant
text evidently dates from the Warring States period,52 some scholars
believe it reflects the tradition of Ch’i military studies53 and preserves at
least vestiges, if not the core, of the oldest strata of Chinese military
thought.54 After the great conquest over the Shang the T’ai Kung was
enfeoffed as king of Ch’i, no doubt as much to stabilize the eastern area
as to reward him for his efforts (and simultaneously remove him as a
potential military threat). Thereafter the martial tradition and military
studies flourished and became identified with Ch’i; Sun-tzu’s clan was
one of the four powerful ones who later contended for supremacy in the
state.
   Because of the T’ai Kung’s legendary position in China’s martial
tradition and the importance of historical material from this period for
understanding Sun-tzu’s era and milieu, his biography in the Shih chi is
well worth presenting. An elderly, mysterious figure whose early life was
shrouded in secrecy even when he first appeared in the Chou, the T’ai
Kung had perhaps found the Shang ruler insufferable and feigned
madness to escape court life and the monarch’s power. He disappeared
only to resurface in the Chou countryside at the apocryphal age of
seventy-two. Apart from his storied longevity, his initial interview with
King Wen was also marked by the mythic aura that frequently
characterizes inevitable meetings between great historical figures:
       T’ai Kung Wang, Lü Shang, was a native of the Eastern Sea
       area.55 His ancestor once served as a labor director, and in
       assisting Yü in pacifying the waters, had merit. In the interval
       between Emperor Shun and the Hsia dynasty he was enfeoffed at
Lü, or perhaps at Shen, and surnamed Chiang. During the Hsia
and Shang dynasties some of the sons and grandsons of the
collateral lines were enfeoffed at Lü and Shen, some were
commoners, and Shang was their descendant. His original
surname was Chiang, but he was [subsequently] surnamed from
his fief, so was called Lü Shang.
   Lü Shang, impoverished and in straits, was already old when,
through fishing, he sought out the Lord of the West [King
Wen].56 The Lord of the West was about to go hunting, and
divined about [the prospects]. What [the diviner] said was: “What
you will obtain will be neither dragon nor serpent, neither tiger
nor bear. What you will obtain is an assistant for a hegemon57 or
king.” Thereupon the Lord of the West went hunting, and indeed
met the T’ai Kung on the sunny side of the Wei River. After
speaking with him he was greatly pleased and said, “My former
lord, the T’ai Kung, said ‘There should be a Sage who will come
to Chou, and Chou will thereby flourish. ’ Are you truly this
[one] or not? My T’ai Kung looked out [wang] for you for a long
time.” Thus he called him T’ai Kung Wang,58 and returned
together with him in the carriage, establishing him as a
strategist.59
  Someone said, “The T’ai Kung has extensive learning, and
once served King Chou [of the Shang]. King Chou lacked the
Way [Tao], so he left him. He traveled about exercising his
persuasion on the various feudal lords,60 but didn’t encounter
anyone [suitable], and in the end returned west with the Lord of
the West.”
  Someone else said, “Lü Shang was a retired scholar who had
hidden himself on the seacoast.61 When the Lord of the West
was confined at Yu-li, San-i Sheng and Hung Yao, having long
known him, summoned Lü Shang. Lü Shang also said, ‘I have
heard that the Lord of the West is a Worthy, and moreover excels
at nurturing the old, so I guess I’ll go there.’ The three men
sought out beautiful women and unusual objects on behalf of the
Lord of the West, and presented them to King Chou in order to
ransom the Lord of the West. The Lord of the West was thereby
able to go out and return to his state.”
   Although the ways they say Lü Shang came to serve the Lord
of the West differ, still the essential point is that he became
strategist to Kings Wen and Wu.
   After the Lord of the West was extricated from Yu-li and
returned [to Chou], he secretly planned with Lü Shang and
cultivated his Virtue in order to overturn Shang’s government.
The T’ai Kung’s affairs were mostly concerned with military
authority and unorthodox stratagems,62 so when later generations
speak about armies and the Chou’s secret balance of power
[ch’üan,]63 they all honor the T’ai Kung for making the
fundamental plans.
  The Lord of the West’s government was equitable, [even]
extending to settling the conflict between the Yü and Jui. The
poet [in the Book of Odes] refers to the Lord of the West as King
Wen after he received the Mandate [of Heaven]. He attacked
Ch’ung, Mi-hsü, and Chüan-i64 and constructed a great city at
Feng. If All under Heaven were divided into thirds, two-thirds
had [already] given their allegiance to the Chou.65 The Ta’i
Kung’s plans and schemes occupied the major part.
   When King Wen died, King Wu ascended the throne. In the
ninth year, wanting to continue King Wen’s task, he mounted an
attack in the east to observe whether the feudal lords would
assemble or not. When the army set out, the T’ai Kung wielded
the yellow battle ax in his left hand, and grasped the white
pennon in his right, in order to swear the oath.

       Ts’ang-ssu! Ts’ang-ssu!66
       Unite your masses of common people
       with your boats and oars.
       Those who arrive after will be beheaded.
Thereafter he went to Meng-chin. The number of feudal lords
who assembled of their own accord was eight hundred. The
feudal lords all said, “King Chou can be attacked.” King Wu said,
“They cannot yet.” He returned the army and made the Great
Oath with the T’ai Kung.67
   After they had remained in Chou for two years, King Chou
killed Prince Pi-kan and imprisoned Chi-tzu. King Wu, wanting
to attack King Chou, performed divination with the tortoise shell
to observe the signs. They were not auspicious, and violent wind
and rain arose. The assembled Dukes were all afraid, but the T’ai
Kung stiffened them to support King Wu.68 King Wu then went
forth.
  In the eleventh year, the first month, on the day chia-tzu he
swore the oath at Mu-yeh and attacked King Chou of the Shang.
King Chou’s army was completely defeated. King Chou turned
and ran off, mounting the Deer Tower. They then pursued and
beheaded King Chou.69 On the morrow King Wu was
established at the altars: The Dukes presented clear water; K’ang
Shu-feng of Wei spread out a variegated mat; the Shih Shang-fu
[the T’ai Kung] led the sacrificial animals; and the Scribe I
chanted the prayers, in order to announce to the spirits the
punishment of King Chou’s offenses. They distributed the money
from the Deer Tower, and gave out grain from the Chü-ch’iao
granary, in order to relieve the impoverished people. They
enfeoffed Pi-kan’s grave, and released Chi-tzu from
imprisonment. They moved the nine cauldrons,70 rectified the
government of Chou, and began anew with All under Heaven.
The Shih Shang-fu’s [T’ai Kung’s] plans occupied the major
part.71
   Thereupon King Wu, having already pacified the Shang and
become King of All under Heaven, enfeoffed the T’ai Kung at
Ying-ch’iu in Ch’i. The T’ai Kung went east to go to his state,
staying overnight on the road and traveling slowly. The innkeeper
said, “I have heard it said that time is hard to get but easy to lose.
Our guest sleeps extremely peacefully. Probably he isn’t going to
return to his state.” The T’ai Kung, overhearing it, got dressed
that night and set out, reaching his state just before first light. The
Marquis of Lai came out to attack, and fought with him for Ying-
ch’iu. Ying-ch’iu bordered Lai. The people of Lai were Yi people
       who, taking advantage of the chaos under King Chou and the new
       settlement of the Chou dynasty, assumed Chou would not be able
       to assemble the distant quarters. For this reason they battled with
       the T’ai Kung for his state.
          When the T’ai Kung reached his state he rectified the
       government in accord with their customs72, simplified the
       Chou’s forms of propriety [li]; opened up the occupations of the
       merchants and artisans; and facilitated the realization of profits
       from fishing and salt. In large numbers the people turned their
       allegiance to Ch’i, and Ch’i became a great state.73

          Then when King Ch’eng of the Chou was young,74 Kuan Shu
       and Ts’ai Shu revolted, and the Yi people of the Hua River valley
       turned against the Chou. So [King Ch’eng] had Duke Chao
       K’ang issue a mandate to the T’ai Kung: “To the east as far as the
       sea, the west to the Yellow River, south to Mu-ling, and north to
       Wu-ti, completely rectify and put in order the five marquis and
       nine earls.75 From this Ch’i was able to conduct a campaign of
       rectification and attack [the rebellious], and became a great state.
       Its capital was Ying-ch’iu.
         When the T’ai Kung died he was probably more than a
       hundred years old. . . .
       •••
       The Grand Historian says: “I went to Ch’i—from Lang-yeh
       which belongs to Mt. T’ai, north to where it fronts the sea, two
       thousand li of fertile land. Its people are expansive,76 and many
       conceal their knowledge. It’s their Heaven-given nature. Taking
       the T’ai Kung’s Sageness in establishing his state, isn’t it
       appropriate that Duke Huan flourished and cultivated good
       government, and was thereby able to assemble the feudal lords in
       a covenant. Vast, vast, truly the style of a great state.”77
  Despite this detailed biography of the T’ai Kung in Ssu-ma Ch’ien’s
generally reliable Shih chi, over the millennia Confucian skeptics even
denied his very existence. Others, perturbed by the confusing traditions
regarding his origin, consigned him to a minor role. Both groups justified
their views by citing the absence of references to the T’ai Kung in the
traditionally accepted archaic texts that supposedly provide an authentic
record of these epoch-making events—the Shang shu78 and Ch’un ch’iu
[Spring and Autumn Annals.] Thus, skeptics generally appear to follow
the thinking of the second great Confucian, the pedantic Mencius, in
refusing to accept the brutal nature of military campaigns and the
inevitable bloodshed.79 King Wu’s herculean efforts over the many
years prior to the conquest, and his achievements in imposing
rudimentary Chou control over the vast Shang domain also tend to be
slighted. Consequently, the two figures historically associated with
sagacity, virtue, and the civil—King Wen and the Duke of Chou—are
revered while the strategist and final commander, the representatives of
the martial, are ignored and dismissed. However, after examining
numerous stories and references in disparate texts and winnowing away
the legendary and mythic material, other scholars and historians have
concluded that the T’ai Kung not only existed but also played a
prominent role in Chou history—much as described in the Shih chi
biography.80 Although the details of his initial encounter with King Wen
seem likely to remain unknown, the T’ai Kung was probably a
representative of the Chiang clan with whom the Chou were militarily
allied and had intermarried for generations.81 No doubt, as with the Hsia
dynasty, whose formerly mythic existence assumes concrete dimensions
with the ongoing discovery of ancient artifacts, the T’ai Kung will
eventually be vindicated by historical evidence.82


              Consolidation and the Western Chou

The Chou kings were confronted with the immediate problem of ruling
an empire of disparate peoples and far-flung territories with only a small
Chou population. Although the Chou had apparently enjoyed the
allegiance of roughly eight hundred states in the final campaign against
the Shang, many had also opposed them. These enemy peoples, the tens
of thousands of Shang nobility, and even the populace of their own allies
all had to be effectively controlled, and smoldering rebellions quenched.
Immediately after the famous battle at Mu-yeh, King Wu had the T’ai
Kung secure the Chou hold over the surrounding area. Next, when
returning to the capital, the Chou vanquished a number of recalcitrant
states lying along the corridor of their march.83 Finally, the Western
Chou consolidated their rule through several political and military
measures, the most important of which was the enfeoffment of powerful
clan members among both allied and dissident states. Each person so
enfeoffed would establish a collateral family line and would emigrate
with his family members, retainers, and military forces. They would
constitute a Chou enclave among the local people and would
immediately construct a walled town, which would function as the Chou
military, political, economic, administrative, and cultural center.84
   The Chou also forced thousands of Shang noble families to emigrate
to the eastern capital region, where they could be adequately supervised
and controlled, although they were allowed to retain most of their own
officials, customs, and laws.85 Thereafter, the early Chou kings imposed
their rule and consolidated their power through close connections with
all the vassals thus established. The obedience of these feudal lords was
ensured by their participation in clan activities and power, was reinforced
by their military and political inferiority, and was emphasized by their
relative isolation—all of which necessitated mutual cooperation under
the king’s directives. The Shang’s theocratic character was displaced by
a more worldly approach, although the Chou king preserved and
emphasized his right to sacrifice to the ancestors, whose intimate
involvement in state affairs remained necessary, and to Heaven, which
had sanctified Chou’s revolutionary activity.

   In addition to maintaining six royal armies86 and posting garrison
units throughout the realm, the Chou also incorporated eight armies from
the vanquished Shang and could summon the forces of their own vassals
as necessary. These units were still composed essentially of nobility,
although they were assisted by commoners, personal retainers, and
servants in a secondary role. No doubt the shih—minor descendants of
the ruling house, younger sons of earls and dukes, and other members of
the lesser nobility—also furnished many of the combatants and foot
support. Throughout the Western Chou period, the actual fighting was
conducted by men of rank and was marked increasingly by mutual
deference and respect, with the chariot dominating as the focus of power
and mobility.
   Following the final conquest of the peripheral areas and their
integration under central authority through the imposition of a feudal
system, the first few hundred years of the Western Chou period
witnessed no dramatic changes in military technology or strategy. Armor
more suited to the increasingly active role played by infantrymen
appeared and evolved, thanks to improvements in tanning and leather-
working capabilities. Coincident with the consistent advances in
metallurgical skills, the shape of weapons continued to evolve slowly,
becoming longer, stronger, and more complex, eventually resulting in the
development of the true sword, which appeared in limited quantities by
the end of the Western Chou in 771 B.C. However, long weapons
persisted—for fighting either from chariots or dismounted—with the
halberd (dagger-ax) predominating.
   After only four generations, the central power of the Western Chou
began to erode, dissipated partly by fatal expansionist campaigns into the
south. Early on, the Western Chou became preoccupied with barbarian
threats from the north and west, and they were impoverished as the kings
continued to grant fiefs and rewards to the loyal vassals who sustained
the government. Consequently, the feudal lords gradually rose in power,
and although still reluctantly obedient to the king’s demands, they
became increasingly self-conscious about their regional identities,
particularly as they interacted with local peoples and cultures. The ruling
house was also plagued by weak and incompetent rulers, some of whom
had obviously forgotten that King Chou’s debauchery was among the
justifications cited when King Wu presumptuously claimed the sanction
of the Mandate of Heaven. Eventually, in 771 B.C., a Chou King,
restored to the throne through the efforts of vassal states, was compelled
to move the capital ignominiously to the east to avoid barbarian
pressures and prolong the myth of dynasty. Ironically, one of his
defensive actions was to enfeoff the ancestors of the state of Ch’in as a
reward for their horsebreeding efforts, in the expectations that they (who
were semibarbarians themselves) would form a bulwark against the
nomadic tide.


                  THE SPRING AND AUTUMN
   The Spring and Autumn period (722-481 B.C.), named after the
famous Confucian classic chronicling the era, witnessed the rise of state
power, development of internecine strife, and destruction of numerous
political entities. At its inception, descendants of the various Chou feudal
lords still ruled in most states, generally in conjunction with other
members of their immediate families and the local nobility. Although
they appeared to exercise supreme power, their positions depended
largely upon the kinship system and the state as extensions of the greater
clan. With the Chou’s continued decline, the states were effectively freed
of their subservient status and therefore were able to exercise increasing
independence in their activities. Their new assertiveness reflected not
only the shift in the balance of power from a central authority to
peripheral actors but also the distinct weakening of the original ties of
kinship upon which enfeoffment had been based. The passing of
generations, combined with the inherent difficulties of traveling to the
capital to participate actively in the Chou court, had contributed to this
estrangement. Although the feudal lords continued to seek Chou
sanctification and strongmen later appeared to wield power as hegemons
in the dynasty’s name, their acquiescence in major political and military
affairs had to be sought—rather than being mandated—by the king.
Freed of old constraints, the feudal lords focused on internal strife and
interstate conflict instead of devoting themselves to performing the
duties of vassals.
   The locus of state power also tended to shift from the enfeoffed ruling
house to the contending parties. From the beginning to the middle of the
era, the ministerial families—mostly collateral descendants of the first
feudal lord—grew more powerful. In many states they even wrested
control of the government from the legitimate line, only to exterminate
each other in the next century. By the end of the period the surviving
states all had effective despots—either members of the founding family
who had managed to reseize power or survivors from one of the great
families that had usurped the throne. Because more than a hundred states
were annexed or extinguished during the Spring and Autumn period—
with their ruling clans and great families reduced to commoners,
enslaved, or killed—much of the original feudal nobility ceased to
exist.87
   As a result of the predatory campaigns of the stronger states, the scope
of warfare in the Spring and Autumn period increased dramatically. It
necessairly involved greater numbers of peasants as integral elements
because it could not depend solely upon the nobility. Sustained combat,
at least on open terrain, apparently remained centered on the chariot
supported by infantry forces, which grew more and more numerous.
Concepts of chivalry initially prevailed, and the ethics of battle dictated
adherence to the li (forms of propriety), although conscripted infantry
were little bound by them. Within a century, however, only the foolish
and soon-to-be-defeated were burdened by the old code of ethics, and the
ancient style of individual combat—despite personal challenges still
offered to instigate battles—was outmoded.88
   Early in the period, campaign armies consisted of roughly several
hundred to a thousand chariots, accompanied by perhaps ten thousand
men. However, by the end of the Spring and Autumn period in 481 B.C.,
the strong states of Ch’in and Ch’i fielded approximately four thousand
chariots each, supported by forty thousand infantrymen. Cavalry
remained unknown, and in 541 B.C. the Chin commander even
compelled his reluctant chariot forces to dismount and—as infantrymen
—engage barbarian foot soldiers.89
  Combat weapons throughout the period were similar to those of the
Western Chou, with the infantrymen depending more upon spears and
short swords than the dagger-ax (halberd), which was the weapon par
excellence of charioteers.90 Metalworking skills continued to advance,
resulting in stronger, sharper, larger, and more-deadly combat tools. Yet
bronze technology remained the norm, with the newly discovered
processes of iron and steel technology (in the late Spring and Autumn
period) confined largely to the production of agricultural implements.91
   Wars occurred frequently, and even the most powerful state, should it
fail to prepare its defenses and train its soldiers, could be vanquished.
Consequently, the recognition and retention of individuals proficient in
the military arts became essential, and rewards—including position,
honors, and rank—for valor, strength, and military achievements were
initiated. Basic physical qualifications for members of the standing army
and for those selected to more elite units were maintained.92
   As talent grew in importance, resulting in social mobility,
bureaucracies staffed by capable individuals began to expand,
supplementing and then displacing government by members of the
ruler’s clan and the entrenched nobility. More-direct forms of
administration, through the establishment of districts rather than through
enfeoffment, apparently emerged, permitting the central government to
wield greater power over the entire state. Peasants slowly began to gain
land tenancy instead of being serfs; they prospered economically as
property gradually became a transferable commodity rather than the sole
possession of the king.


               THE WARRING STATES PERIOD

  At the beginning of the Warring States period in 403 B.C., the pace of
events accelerated. The conflicts of the Spring and Autumn period had
segmented China into seven powerful survivor-states,93 each contending
for control of the realm, and fifteen weaker states for them to prey upon.
The feudal lords had by then evolved into despotic monarchs who were
compelled to nurture the development of extensive economic and
political bureaucracies just to survive. In order to suppress external
threats effectively, virtually every ruler had to expand his state’s
agricultural base. The immigration of disaffected people from other
states was encouraged by policies providing them with land, and tenancy
and landownership continued their swift development. After 500 B.C.
iron implements came into general use, and drainage and irrigation
projects vastly increased the food reserves—and therefore strength—of
some areas. Trade and commerce flourished, and as a result, a class of
influential merchants arose, although they continued to be officially
despised.
  During the Warring States period, the scale of conflict surged
phenomenally, sustained by the increasing agricultural productivity and
expanding material prosperity. In the Shang a few thousand men had
once constituted an army, whereas now the weaker states easily fielded
100,000 and the strongest, in the third century B.C., reportedly
maintaining a standing army of nearly a million, is said to have even
mobilized 600,000 for a single campaign. In the battle between Ch’in
and Ch’u the total number of combatants apparently exceeded a million,
an astounding figure even after discounting for inaccuracy and
exaggeration. Numerical strength had become critical, for in the previous
campaign Ch’in, with 200,000 soldiers, had suffered a severe defeat.
Naturally, casualties also escalated rapidly, with 100,000 from Wei dying
at the battle of Ma-ling in 341 B.C.; 240,000 in the combined forces of
Wei and Han perishing at I-ch’üeh in 295 B.C.; and 450,000 men of
Ch’u being slaughtered at Ch’angp’ing in 260 B.C. Campaigns of such
magnitude required lengthy periods for logistical preparation,
mobilization, and engagement. Instead of a few days or weeks on the
march, with perhaps a couple of days in battle, as in the Shang, months
and even years were necessary, with the battles raging for tens of days,
or stalemates persisting for a year or more.
   Managing the employment of such vast resources and manpower
demanded great expertise, and the profession of arms quickly developed.
Whereas the newly free masses were generally registered and subjected
to military training on a seasonal basis and were conscripted for combat
when needed, the army’s core had to be composed of practiced,
disciplined officers and soldiers. Drill manuals and deployment methods,
as well as the tactics they would be designed to execute, suddenly
became indispensable. An extensive body of military theory appeared,
stimulated not only by battlefield and training requirements but also by
new political theories and individual philosophies. Numerous military
books—remnants of which survive—were no doubt composed during the
early part of the Warring States, and their theories found rigorous
employment thereafter.
   The commander’s qualifications and responsibilities also changed
during the period, with strategy becoming so complex that the
replacement of a general could, and frequently did, result in an army’s
defeat and the endangerment of an entire nation. Although rulers
continued to meddle in army matters—with catastrophic results—often
at the instigation of jealous ministers or corrupt officials acting on behalf
of foreign powers, in general, professional officers who specialized
solely in military affairs appeared. Early in the Warring States period the
ideal commander was normally an effective, even exemplary, civilian
administrator, such as Wu Ch’i, but toward the end, the civilian realm
became increasingly estranged from the realities of warfare.94
   During the Shang and early Chou periods, battles were fought on
agricultural and otherwise open, undefended terrain, with mobilized
armies encountering only scattered cities during their advances. Some
fortifications seem always to have existed—such as the famous thick
neolithic and Shang dynasty stamped-earth walls that are still being
discovered—but forces could essentially roam through the countryside
unhampered until encountering them. In the Warring States period the
feudal lords undertook the expanded defense of borders, constructing
“great walls,” ramparts, forts, and guard towers throughout the
countryside to defend the entire territory against incursion.95 States
protected their land more than their people, and the objective of warfare
changed as each state sought not to capture prisoners and plunder for
riches but to vanquish its enemies by seizing their lands, exterminating
their armies, gaining political control of their populace, and
administratively annexing their territory.
   Fortified cities, previously military and administrative centers, grew
enormously in significance as industry, trade, and population all
flourished, and they became focal points in the road network.
Accordingly, whereas in the Western Chou and Spring and Autumn
periods it was advisable to circumvent these isolated cities rather than to
waste men and resources besieging and assaulting them, their capture or
destruction now assumed critical importance. Techniques for assault and
defense advanced simultaneously, with siege engines, mobile shields,
battering rams, catapults, mobile towers, and similar mobile devices
appearing in substantial numbers. Specialists in the technologies of
assault and defense were needed: The Mohists, who created and
mastered defensive techniques and measures, became famous for their
dedication to assisting the targets of aggression. Therefore, Sun-tzu’s
condemnation of besieging and assaulting cities had become outdated by
the time of Sun Pin’s analysis of vulnerable and impregnable targets in
his Military Methods.96
  The growth of mass infantry armies was also accompanied by the
perfection and widespread use of the crossbow during the fourth century
B.C.;97 by further developments in articulation, deployment, and
maneuvering capabilities; and by the reluctant adoption of barbarian
practices to create the cavalry. 98 Under constant pressure from mounted
steppe horsemen, various perceptive commanders and rulers realized the
need to develop their own cavalry. Although the history of the horse in
China is still emerging, it appears that in 307 B.C. King Wu-ling of
North Chao, over vehement objections, deliberately—to facilitate
adoption of the cavalry—forced on his troops the “barbarian style of
dress” (short jacket and trousers) instead of the indigenous and much-
revered long coat of the Chinese. Since the fifth century mounted
horsemen had apparently been challenging the Chinese states. The skill
of riding probably evolved from Iran and the steppe region, and foreign
horses had long been famous in China for their speed and endurance.
Wu-ling created the first known cavalry, immediately providing the state
with a vastly increased offensive potential.
   The saddle, when there was one, was extremely primitive—only a
rolled blanket, and stirrups did not appear until the end of the Han.
Consequently, the rider was burdened with the task of simultaneously
controlling his horse and either shooting his bow or striking with his
shock weapon. The effectiveness of the horsemen, acting from such an
unstable platform, was inevitably limited and stemmed more from their
great speed and mobility than inherent fighting power. However, the
development of the cavalry—mentioned only briefly in the military
books prior to T’ang T’ai-tsung—freed armies from being confined to
open, chariot-accessible terrain and allowed their diffuse deployment in
ravines, valleys, forests, hilly fields, and mountains, fully exploiting the
terrain.99 Supported by vast hordes of armored infantrymen wielding
spears, crossbows, and swords (possibly of iron),100 warfare on an
unprecedented scale suddenly became both possible and inevitable. In
the final century of conflict—the third century B.C., which witnessed the
growth and decisive triumph of Ch’in—massive campaigns requiring
hundreds of thousands of men executing both “explosive” and
“persisting” strategies decimated the populace and the countryside. In
those days the strategies and methods of the famous tacticians were
repeatedly tested and applied and were proven to have a timeless
validity.


                           The State of Wei
The history of Wei, an important participant in the politics of the era,
reflects the evolution of military affairs during the Warring States period.
Wu Ch’i101 became a famous general and military administrator in Wei,
whereas both Mencius, the early Confucian standard-bearer, and Wei
Liao-tzu, reputed progenitor of the military classic bearing his name,
squandered their persuasive skills on King Hui. One of the seven powers
in the Warring States period, Wei had become an independent political
entity in 434 B.C. when three powerful families carved the large,
formerly mighty state of Chin into Wei, Chao, and Han. In 403 B.C. the
Chou king recognized the de facto rulers as feudal lords, and in 376 B.C.
they completely exterminated the remnants of the Chin ruling house.
Situated in the central part of China between the contending powers of
Ch’in to the west and Ch’i to the east, Wei was the strongest of the so-
called three Chin. Initially, the capital was at An-i, but the fertile plains
area in which it was located lacked such natural defenses as mountains
and ravines, and the government suffered from constant pressure from
hostile neighbors in all directions. When the government was strong and
prosperous, it could retain control over the West Ho region and thus fend
off any threat from the belligerent Ch’in; when weak—through the
ruler’s ineptitude or some disaster—it suffered repeated defeats in the
incessant warfare. Furthermore, whereas Ch’in had been successfully
stymied by the strength of the great Chin, once the latter was segmented,
the successor states—indifferent to mutual cooperation—lacked the
power necessary for independent survival.
   King Wen, who reigned from the inception of Wei until 387 B.C.,
realized the need for talented advisers and welcomed worthy men
irrespective of their regional origin. Li K’o, one of the outsiders who
responded to this policy, was appointed to high office and had great
impact. He rewrote the laws, promulgated measures to increase
agricultural production, established private property, and fostered a
stable commodity-price policy. Hsi-men Pao focused his efforts upon
irrigation, thereby greatly increasing the nation’s wealth. Wu Ch’i,
appointed commanding general, conducted numerous successful
campaigns against the Ch’in and secured the defense of the West Ho
region. King Wen’s son King Wu continued Wu Ch’i’s basic policy,
thereby compelling the other Chin states of Han and Chao to respect
Wei’s might and prosperity, although Wu Ch’i was ignominiously forced
by court intrigues to flee for his life.
   Unfortunately, King Hui—who assumed power in 370 B.C.—was
more successful in antagonizing people than in employing them, and he
forfeited the services of many talented individuals, such as Lord Shang
(who subsequently was instrumental in strengthening Ch’in). Instead of
nurturing harmonious relations with his neighbors, he appears to have
annoyed them constantly, greatly exacerbating the pressures and
conflicts on all sides. Furthermore, he eventually lost the West Ho
region, thereby opening the state to incursions by Ch’in, and was forced
to move the capital to Ta-liang, thereafter calling the state Liang.
   Two famous battles illustrate the nature of warfare in this period. The
first, at Kui-ling, stemmed from King Hui’s desire to recoup losses
suffered at the hands of Ch’in in the west. Wei’s army, under the
command of P’ang Chüan, attacked Chao in the north. Finding itself
hard-pressed, Chao requested aid from Ch’i, in the east, on the premise
that as Chao presented a natural barrier and defense against Wei, it would
be strategically advantageous for Ch’i to support Chao’s efforts.
Although the Ch’i ruler assented, Sun Pin—the famous strategist whose
book has recently been rediscovered—advised waiting for the two
antagonists to exhaust themselves, thereby ensuring maximum gain with
minimum risk and effort. In 352 B.C., under the command of T’ien Chi,
Ch’i mobilized an army to effect an indirect strike at the Wei homeland,
the critical city of Ta-liang, in accord with the principles of “first seize
what they love,” “attack vacuity,” and “strike where undefended.” P’ang
Chüan, flushed with his victories in Chao, reacted as predicted, racing
back to mount a counterattack. Ch’i then feigned concern and withdrew
to its chosen battlefield to await the Wei army, thereby following a
number of basic tactical principles from Sun-tzu and Sun Pin, such as
“with ease await the tired.” From its fortified positions and high terrain
Ch’i was able to quickly defeat the exhausted Wei army, inflicting severe
casualties at minimal cost.
   Some years later, Wei found itself being increasingly squeezed by a
newly vigorous Han, to the south; Ch’in, to the west; Ch’i, to the east;
and Chao, to the north. King Hui embarked on a campaign against Han,
which had become formidable through the administrative efforts of the
famous theorist Shen Pu-hai and by forming an alliance with and
returning to Chao the cities previously lost. P’ang Chüan, again entrusted
with command, struck directly at the Han capital. Han, as Chao had
before, sought aid from Ch’i, citing the benefits of mutual defense.
Again Sun Pin advised waiting for the forces to decimate each other,
further weakening Wei. Han mounted a total defensive effort but lost five
major battles in succession and was forced to submit to Ch’in in a
desperate effort to survive. Ch’i then sallied forth, following the previous
strategy, with Sun Pin as strategist and T’ien Chi in command. P’ang
Chüan immediately abandoned his campaign in Han, turning back
toward his home state. Meanwhile, King Hui mobilized all his resources,
placing his son in command of the home-defense troops, with the sole
aim of seeking a decisive confrontation with Ch’i.
   Under Sun Pin’s direction the Ch’i armies, which were advancing into
Wei, followed the dictum “Be deceptive.” P’ang Chüan arrogantly
believed the men of Ch’i to be cowards who would flee rather than
engage mighty Wei in battle. Therefore, Sun Pin daily reduced the
number of cooking fires in the encampment to create a facade of ever-
increasing desertion. He also effected a tactical withdrawal to further
entice P’ang Chüan into the favorable terrain at Ma-ling where the Ch’i
commander concealed ten thousand crossbowmen among the hills. P’ang
Chüan, apparently afraid that he would miss an opportunity to inflict a
severe blow on the retreating Ch’i army, abandoned his heavy forces and
supply train and rushed forth with only light units. Arriving at night, the
combined Wei forces were am-bushed as soon as they penetrated the
killing zone. In addition to being decisively defeated by Ch’i’s withering
crossbow fire, 100,000 Wei soldiers needlessly perished because of their
commander’s character flaws and hasty judgment.102
   Thereafter, Wei not only never regained its former power but also
suffered numerous incursions by the now-unchecked mighty Ch’in,
which would eventually subjugate all China. In 340 B.C. Wei was forced
to cede 700 li to Ch’in after sustained defeats, and felt compelled to
move its capital to Ta-liang to avoid the incessant danger. Although a
strong figure occasionally emerged to effect a temporary resurgence in
Wei’s strength, its territory continued to shrink until the state, together
with the royal house, was finally extinguished in 225 B.C.


                        The Military Writings
In order to appreciate the great value and inherent importance of the
Chinese military classics, one should note several brief historical and
political points. First, military works were not normally permitted in
private hands, and their possession could be construed as evidence of a
conspiracy. (Possession of the T’ai Kung’s Six Secret Teachings—a book
advocating and instructing revolution—would be particularly fatal.)
Second, almost all these teachings were at first transmitted through the
generations, often orally and always secretly. Eventually they were
recorded—committed to written form on bamboo slips—and sometimes
became public knowledge. Government scribes and designated officials
gathered the slips for state use, depositing them in imperial libraries,
where they were so highly valued that they were exempted from the
infamous book burnings of the Ch’in dynasty. Once stored away, they
were accessible to a few professors of the classics, a restricted number of
high officials, and the emperor himself. Even these privileged
individuals might still be denied access to the critical writings, especially
if they were related to the imperial family.
   Even after the teachings were recorded in manuscript form on
bamboo, silk, or eventually paper (after the Han dynasty), patriots
sometimes felt compelled to remove them from public domain. General
Chang Liang, who played a fundamental role in the overthrow of the
tyrannical Ch’in dynasty and in the establishment of the Han, for
example, supposedly had the sole copy of the Three Strategies of Huang
Shih-kung, from which he had personally profited, buried with him in his
casket. According to one tradition, however, the text resurfaced when his
tomb was vandalized in the fourth century A.D. Another example is the
well-known (although perhaps apocryphal) refusal of Li Wei-kung, a
famous strategist and effective general, to provide the T’ang emperor
with more than defensive knowledge and tactics. In the view of Li Wei-
kung, strategies for aggressive action should not be disseminated
because, with the empire already at peace, they could only aid and
interest those who wanted to precipitate war and incite revolution.
   The seven military books, as they have been traditionally arranged in
the Seven Military Classics since the Sung dynasty, are:
       Sun-tzu’s Art of War
       Wu-tzu
       The Methods of the Ssu-ma (Ssu-ma Fa)
       Questions and Replies Between
       T’ang T’ai-tsung and Li Wei-kung
       Wei Liao-tzu
       Three Strategies of Huang Shih-kung
       T’ai Kung’s Six Secret Teachings.
   Although uncertainty abounds regarding the authorship and dates of
several of the classics, as well as to what extent they are composite
books drawing upon common ground and lost writings, the traditional
order unquestionably is not chronological. Sun-tzu’s Art of War has
generally been considered the oldest and greatest extant Chinese military
work, even though the purported author of the Six Secret Teachings—the
T’ai Kung—was active hundreds of years earlier than the (possibly)
historical Sun-tzu. Materials preserved in the Ssu-ma Fa reputedly
extend back into the early Chou; the Wu-tzu may have been recorded by
Wu Ch’i’s disciples, although suffering from later accretions; and the
Three Strategies probably follows the Wei Liao-tzu, yet traditionalists
still associate it with the T’ai Kung. Accordingly, one possible order
(with many caveats and unstated qualifications) might well be:


              INITIAL PERIOD        Ssu-ma Fa

                                    Art of War

              SECOND PERIOD         Wu-tzu

              THIRD PERIOD          Wei Liao-tzu

                                    Six Secret Teachings

                                    Three Strategies

              T’ANG-SUNG            Questions and Replies


   Much of the evidence for ascribing dates of composition to particular
periods is tenuous and often circular, and the systematic study of the
evolution of strategic thought and military concepts remains to be
undertaken. However, the preceding sequence—although possibly
infuriating Sun-tzu advocates—seems sustainable in the light of both
traditional textual scholarship and recent tomb discoveries. The relative
order of books in the third period (which probably coincides with the
latter half of the third century B.C.) remains to be defined.103 A
summary discussion of the various viewpoints on the Art of War and
their purported justifications, as well as a consideration of whether Sun-
tzu even existed and what historical role he might have played, will be
found at the end of the introduction to the translation.


               Ancient Warfare and its Equipment

In recent decades the histories of the horse, chariot, cavalry, and weapons
in the first millennium B.C. have become fairly clear due to China’s
innumerable archaeological discoveries and their systematic publication.
Although a detailed reconstruction of their evolution and impact would
require more than a few monographs, for the convenience of readers
interested in the tools of warfare available to the ancient tacticians in
Sun-tzu’s era, brief overviews are presented here.


                           THE CHARIOT

   The role and importance of chariots as well as the date of their
introduction have been the subject of several articles in recent decades.
Unquestionably, the chariot was introduced from the West through
central Asia around the fourteenth century B.C., and then the
transmission route was probably severed because major Western
developments were never reflected in China. (Hayashi Minao
confidently asserts that the Shang had chariots by 1300 B.C. and that
they were used in hunting.104 Edward L. Shaughnessy holds that the
chariot’s introduction should be dated to 1200 B.C.105) Support for the
theory of diffusion rather than indigenous origin is seen in the absence of
any precursor, such as oxen-pulled wagons or four-wheeled carts,
although horses were domesticated prior to this period.106
  Although the construction of the Chinese chariot was substantially the
same as its Western prototype, the earliest chariots unearthed thus far
have several distinctive characteristics: Each wheel has many more
spokes—sometimes as many as forty-eight; wheel shape is conical; and
the chariot box is rectangular and larger than is the case in the West and
can accommodate three men standing in triangular formation.107 (Some
of these developments are also seen in an intermediate stage in the
Trans-Caucasus versions discovered in this century. 108) No major
alterations occur after its introduction, although there was a historical
tendency toward stronger, heavier, swifter vehicles. Significant minor
innovations and refinements naturally continued over the centuries, such
as in the method of mounting the chariot box on the axle and in the
yoking, with a continuing differentiation into types by use. (Even the
Shang apparently had specialized chariots or carriages for ordinary
transport, chariots designed for combat and the hunt—perhaps in limited
numbers—and something similar to wagons for conveying goods.109)
   In the Shang the chariot was a highly visible symbol of rank and
power and was elaborately decorated, often being covered with imperial
gifts of insignia. However, perhaps because of their greater numbers,
chariots in the Chou were more pragmatic and functional, although they
still conspicuously displayed marks of royal favor.110 Finally, in the
Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods, highly specialized
chariots and other wheeled vehicles were created to suit the requirements
of siege warfare and other specialized assault tasks; they were equipped
with large shields, towers, battering rams, movable ladders, and multiple
arrow crossbows.111
   Tradition holds that Hsi Chung—either as a minister under the Yellow
Emperor or in the Hsia dynasty—created the chariot. The Shang
reputedly employed either seventy or three hundred chariots to
overthrow the Hsia, but this is improbable. The actual degree to which
the Shang employed chariots remains somewhat controversial; some
scholars find no evidence that the Shang employed chariots as a battle
element,112 whereas others—especially traditionally oriented experts
such as Ku Chieh-kang—maintain qualified opposing views.113
However, certain facts are known. For example, even in the later years of
the dynasty, Shang knights were apparently fighting on foot as
infantrymen rather than from chariots. Some of their enemies, however,
seem to have employed them in substantial numbers compared with their
overall forces.114
  The Chou are traditionally noted for increasing the horsepower of their
assault chariots, using four rather than two horses.115 (Shang tombs also
have chariots with four horses, but these may have been for funerary
display rather than for actual use.) One explanation for the Chou’s
startling victory—apart from their superior Virtue and the support of the
people—is the swiftness of their movement and the unexpected crossing
of the Yellow River to the south, thereby avoiding Shang defenses to the
west. (According to the Shih chi, the Shang ruler significantly furthered
the Chou’s efforts by consciously ignoring their approach until they were
suddenly upon him.) In the actual battle three hundred chariots were
probably employed, which matches the reported three thousand members
of the Tiger Guard, assuming the ten-to-one ratio that is frequently
suggested.116 The swiftness and ferocity of the assault surprised the
Shang and might be attributed to the Chou’s superior and perhaps first
effective use of chariot power.
  Significant clashes between the Chou and their steppe neighbors in
which considerable numbers of chariots were employed apparently
commenced in the first centuries of Chou rule; in one such encounter 130
enemy vehicles were reportedly captured.117 Massed chariot battles
were occurring by the ninth century B.C. and continued throughout the
Western Chou era and into the Spring and Autumn period. However, the
effectiveness of the chariot under actual combat conditions has been
questioned in recent decades by Creel118 and others. Although the
chariot promised power, speed, and mobility—at least in contrast to foot
movement—it may have been more symbolic and have served largely as
a command platform rather than an overwhelming assault weapon. This
is not to deny that chariot combat—often involving great numbers—took
place. However, as Yang Hung has discussed, the chariot demanded a
large area, and the warriors positioned on either side in the back
(especially the one on the right who wielded the halberd) could only
engage the enemy when the chariots passed each other perfectly—
neither too far apart nor too head on.119 In addition, their stability and
maneuvering ability—which were restricted by a fixed axle that rendered
turning extremely difficult, especially at speed—were minimal, even on
the flatest plain. (Imagine racing across a corn field without shock
absorbers and attempting to fire a bow or strike a moving, equally
unpredictable opponent with a shock weapon at the last instant.)
   The failure of Wu and Yüeh to adopt the chariot, despite explicit
efforts to inculcate them in their use around 541 B.C., further indicates a
realization of terrain-imposed limitations; both states were mountainous
regions crisscrossed by rivers and streams and marked by lakes, ponds,
and marshes.120 In response to these insurmountable constraints, Wu
and Yüeh stressed infantry and naval forces and developed weapons for
close combat—such as the sword—to such a high degree that they were
famous throughout the realm; when unearthed today, they still retain
their surface and edge qualities.121
   Despite their inherent faults, chariots did permit the comparatively
rapid conveyance of men, and under the direction of a skilled driver and
reasonable conditions of terrain, they could undoubtedly be formidable.
The romantic image of courageous knights challenging each other from
their glistening, leather armored chariots rings as true for China as the
West, and the chariot was particularly suited to individuals valiantly
racing out and provoking the enemy into hasty action. (However, Creel
has observed that the Age of Chivalry did not begin until the Spring and
Autumn period.122)
   The difficulty of maintaining close formations required advancing at a
measured pace (as edicted by King Wu in his prebattle instructions
preserved in the Shih chi and Ssu-ma Fa) in order to coordinate not only
chariots with chariots but also chariots with supporting infantry. The
necessary imposition and observance of such constraints must have
severely tempered an assault thrust’s maximum speed and, insofar as the
book reflects antique practices, no doubt underlies the Ssu-ma Fa’s
repeated stress on adhering to proper measures. It was possible for
coordinated infantry to take advantage of the chariot’s difficulties and
surround, overturn, or otherwise obstruct it; according to the Tso chuan,
they also constantly failed of their own accord—suffering broken axles,
becoming mired, getting tangled in branches, and falling into unseen
gullies. Perhaps because of these limitations, coupled with their cost and
extensive training requirements, the only effective way for armies to
expand was with infantrymen. However, the growth of infantry divisions
obviously reflected changing social and political conditions as well as a
number of other factors, and experts such as Yang Hung explicitly deny
that the problems of chariot employment caused them to be replaced.123


                  THE HORSE AND CAVALRY

   The horse was domesticated in China in neolithic times but was not
ridden. The indigenous breed, which had a distribution through the
steppe region, was apparently rather small—especially compared with
the mounts of the nomadic peoples who appeared on China’s western
borders around the fifth century B.C. (Creel dogmatically asserts that no
evidence exists for mounted riders in China prior to about 300 B.C.,124
but Shaughnessy suggests the Chinese were encountering mounted riders
by the end of the Spring and Autumn period in 484 B.C.125 Some
traditional scholars, on the basis of scant archaeological evidence, have
argued for a long indigenous development period and for the existence of
riding and hunting as early as the Shang, but this view is largely
discredited.126 Others claim that a Tso chuan entry indicates that
barbarians    were waging mounted warfare by 664 B.C.127
Pulleyblank128 and Yetts129 basically concur with Creel. However,
there are historical references to the famous general Wu Ch’i (440?-361
B.C.) riding on horseback; a similar passage is found in the Wu-tzu
(which is conveniently employed to discredit the work’s authenticity).
Passages in the Six Secret Teachings that discuss the tactical employment
of cavalry are also consigned to a late Warring States date on the basis of
King Wu-ling’s innovation in 307 B.C.130)
   Prior to the fifth century B.C. the nomads were still on foot and fought
as infantry or employed chariots. In the fourth century the Hu peoples
initiated the first mounted incursions against the northern border states of
Chao and Yen. Their horses offered them the obvious advantages of
speed, mobility, and freedom in targeting, immediately spreading the
requirements of static defense over much larger areas. Consequently,
King Wu-ling of Chao resolved to force his warriors to imitate the
barbarian mode of dress (trousers and short jackets) because he believed
such attire was critical in unleashing the cavalry’s power. Apparently, his
intent was to increase the army’s aggressive potential rather than simply
to cope with the Hu, who were not particularly formidable, because he
subsequently attempted to flank and invade Ch’in from the north.131
Thereafter, the horse and cavalry grew in importance but until the Han
dynasty, they remained a minor element in the army despite the tactics
proposed by strategists such as Sun Pin and the T’ai Kung (of the Six
Secret Teachings rather than the historical figure). According to their
works, the cavalry provides mobility; frees the army from having its
main assault weapon (hitherto the chariot) confined to level terrain, and
permits the development of unorthodox maneuvers. Throughout the
Warring States period, chariots remained more important than the
cavalry (although in terms of power and numbers, the infantry came to
play a greater role). Even the conquering Ch’in army, however, only
included about ten percent cavalry. Liu Pang, founder of the Han, created
an elite cavalry unit to turn the tide in his final battles with Hsiang Yü,
but this still only amounted to twenty percent of his total forces.132
   Subsequently, Han Wu-ti, the great expansionist emperor of the
Former Han—determined to secure the famous, superior horses from the
distant nomads—dispatched major campaign armies into central Asia to
subjugate recalcitrant peoples and seize the horses by force.133 One
hundred thousand cavalry, accompanied by as many supply wagons,
embarked on the campaign of 128 to 119 B.C. From this time on the
chariot ceased to have any tactical fighting role (although there was an
abortive attempt by Fang Kuan in the T’ang era to reconstruct and follow
the antique ways). From perhaps the middle of the Former Han era, the
cavalry became an independent battle element that provided focal power
for orthodox tactics and flexibility for executing unorthodox tactics.134
With the invention of stirrups and the development of an effective
saddle, heavy cavalry became possible, although it was displaced again
by light cavalry with the approach of the T’ang. T’ang Tai-tsung made
particularly effective use of the cavalry in wresting control of the empire
and was famous for his horsemanship. He was perhaps of nomadic
ancestry and well understood the effectiveness of cavalry (as is seen in
the military work bearing his name and the accompanying translator’s
introduction).
                   ARMOR AND SHIELDS135

   The primitive armor of the predynastic neolithic period and the Hsia
probably consisted of animal skins, including those of the fearsome tiger,
with little alteration. From the Shang through the end of the Warring
States, leather—generally fashioned from cowhide, although sometimes
from rhino or buffalo—comprised the basic material. When employed in
conjunction with large shields, leather armor apparently provided
adequate protection against the bronze weapons of the period. Based on
evidence from the Chou (and assuming essential continuity between the
Shang and Chou), the mighty Shang warriors wore two-piece leather
armor that covered the front and back, as well as bronze helmets. As the
scope and intensity of conflict increased in the early Chou, construction
techniques changed dramatically—shifting from two large pieces to
multiple small rectangles strung into rows with leather thongs, the rows
then being overlaid to create a lamellar tunic. The individual pieces were
cut from leather that had been tanned, lacquered, and finally colored
(frequently with red or black pigmented lacquer or perhaps decorated
with fierce motifs). Due to the perishable nature of such materials, the
exact course of their evolution remains indistinct, but such armor
probably displaced two-piece models by the Spring and Autumn period.
   Armor was apparently specialized, suited to the warrior’s function and
his mode of fighting. For example, that for charioteers—who remained
basically stationary once ensconced in their vehicle—was generally long
and cumbersome, protecting the entire body while leaving primarily the
arms free. However, the infantry—which was heavily dependent on
agility and foot speed for both its survival and aggressiveness—
obviously fought with shorter leather tunics, fewer restrictive leg
protectors, and far less overall weight. When the cavalry developed,
although they could easily sustain more weight than infantrymen, their
legs had to be unrestricted (but protected against outside attacks), which
accounts for the adoption of barbarian-style trousers and short tunics.
Furthermore, until the invention of the stirrups, excess weight would also
contribute to the rider’s instability. Thus heavy cavalry did not develop
until the post-Han, only to be again displaced by swifter, lighter elements
within a few centuries.
   Even after the development of iron and its application for agricultural
implements and weapons, iron armor—which was necessary to
withstand the greater firepower of the crossbow as well as perhaps
stronger iron swords—did not displace leather until well into the Han
(coincident with the replacement of the bronze sword). Bronze armor
may have have existed in the early Chou, and the use of some
combination of leather with perhaps a reinforcing bronze outer piece
(particularly for the shield) is evident. However, until the advent of iron
plates imitating the leather lamellar construction—thus ensuring
flexibility and endurable weight—metal appears to have been extremely
rare. Even in the Han and thereafter, leather never entirely disappeared,
being employed in a supplementary fashion.
   Shields—an essential adjunct to every warrior’s defensive equipment
—were generally constructed on a wooden frame over which lacquered
leather or various lacquered cloth materials were stretched. All-wood
shields as well as those made from reeds and rushes obviously existed in
some regions and in different eras, although their history has yet to be
reconstructed. But as with body armor, leather was the material of
choice, sometimes with additional protective layers of bronze. With the
rise of iron weapons and the crossbow, iron shields also appeared but
apparently not in great numbers until late in the Warring States or the
Han dynasty.
   Helmets were fashioned from bronze throughout the period, although
iron helmets had appeared by the beginning of the Warring States.
However, as with the iron sword and armor, they did not dominate until
at least the Han.
   Chariots, which evolved little over the period, also used lacquered
leather for reinforcement, as is noted in Wu Chi’s initial interview with
the king in the Wu-tzu. Protection for the horse—the prime target—was
also considered important and may have originated late in the Warring
States period. However, again it was not until the Han that equine armor
became both massive and extensive, reflecting the newly dominant role
of the cavalry and the need to protect the valuable steeds. Outside stimuli
from the mounted, highly mobile steppe peoples may have also
contributed to the development of armor (and perhaps some weapons),
but most developments were indigenous rather than imitative.
                            THE SWORD

   Although there are a few dissenting voices and much controversy
about the origin, evolution, and numbers of swords, it appears that the
true sword—one with the blade more than double the length of the haft
—did not really develop in China until late in the Spring and Autumn
period.136 Prior to this time warriors carried daggers, spear heads, and
sometimes a short sword—all of which were fashioned from bronze.137
(However, based on recent archaeological evidence, some traditionally
oriented scholars have deduced that Western Chou warriors carried
bronze swords.138 An occasional artifact from the Shang is also
classified as a “sword” in the literature, but when its dimensions are
considered, the blade rarely exceeds the length of the haft by much—
consigning it instead to the category of short swords or long daggers.)
   Swords in the Western Chou and Spring and Autumn periods were
designed for piercing and thrusting, not for slashing and cutting
attacks.139 With the advent of the infantry, weapons for close combat
necessarily supplemented and then began to displace the halberd and
other chariot-oriented war implements. In addition to the sword, the short
or hand chi (spear-tipped halberd capable of thrusting attacks much like
a spear140) became very common among Warring States infantrymen—
particularly in states where chariots were tactically unsuitable, such as
Wu and Yüeh.141
   Some scholars have coupled the final evolution and proliferation of
the sword to the development of the cavalry in the late Warring States
period and subsequently the Han dynasty. 142 Extremely long swords,
especially double-edged ones, would be both dangerous and unwieldy
for cavalrymen; 143 therefore, the excessively long swords that
developed in the late Warring States and early Han were probably
exclusively for infantrymen or were simply ceremonial.
  Theories of origin range from imitation of steppe weapons to totally
indigenous development without any nonmetallic precursors.144 One
theory holds that warriors in the Shang and Early Chou carried
spearheads as a sort of short dagger and that from these—especially as
the spearheads became longer and stronger—the short dagger with a
handle and then the elongated sword evolved.145 As the technology of
metalworking progressed, improvements in shape, durability, sharpness,
and appearance rapidly followed. However, whatever their origin,
swords with slashing power and considerable length in comparison with
the handle really only flourished in the late Warring States, Ch’in, and
Han.146
   As the cavalry became the dominant battle element in the armed
forces, the sword evolved to match its requirements. Thus from the Han
onward, a single-edged sword with a ring handle—actually termed a
“knife”—gradually displaced the long swords of the Warring States.
Thereafter, metalworking continually improved, especially layering and
surface treatment; and two distinctive trends emerged—one toward high-
quality, shorter, functional-edged weapons; the other toward purely
ceremonial and elaborately decorated symbolic swords. Steel “knives”
became the sword of choice for both infantrymen and cavalrymen as the
T’ang—the era of the last of the Seven Military Classics—approached.
   Although this brief sketch is inadequate for any true understanding of
the sword and its history, a more extensive consideration requires a
separate book. Readers with a command of Asian languages should
consult Hayashi Minao’s detailed but somewhat dated work147 and
similar writings in Chinese.148


                 MILITARY ORGANIZATION

   Military organization in all its aspects—such as the development of
administrative districts, population registration, and universal military
service obligations—requires a separate study. Opinions on many aspects
—including fundamentals, questions of origin, and early history—are far
from unanimous. However, because knowledge of the basic
organizational methods and principles is helpful to understanding much
of the Seven Military Classics, a brief overview is undertaken here.
  The critical problem in characterizing organization in the Shang
dynasty is the uncertain role the chariot played because some scholars
believe the chariot comprised the core element around which the
company—the basic military unit—was formed. If chariots were
insignificant or only played a transport role, this would obviously not be
possible. Consequently, two theories must be considered: chariot-
centered and clan-centered. In the former, the chariot—manned by three
members of the nobility—would be accompanied by conscripted
commoners, probably ten men per chariot.149 Their function was strictly
supportive; because they would be drawn from the state’s farming and
artisan populations as well as from each noble’s personal retainers—in
an age when bronze weapons were expensive and limited in numbers—
they were only minimally armed.150 Based on burial patterns, this line
of thought holds that the chariots were organized into squads of five,
with either three or five squads to a company. Each squad would be
supported by a one-hundred-man infantry company with (in some views)
a complement of twenty-five officers. A battalion composed of three or
five squads with associated infantry would constitute an operational unit.
(Conclusive evidence for these reconstructions is lacking.151)
   Another view—based on excavated tombs—suggests the total number
per tsu, or company, was one hundred: three officers for the chariot and
seventy-two infantry organized into three platoons, supported by a
supply vehicle staffed by twenty-five. However, this conceptualization
seems to derive from the later idealization found in the Chou li and more
likely describes the state of affairs late in the Spring and Autumn.152
   Considerable textual evidence suggests that the clan composed the
basic organizational unit, with the tsu (a different character than that
above) again numbering one hundred men.153 The members would all
be from the nobility, under the command of the clan chief—who would
normally also be the king, an important vassal, or a local feudal lord.
Thus organized, they probably fought as infantry units, although chariots
could also have been integrated for transport and command purposes.
(According to Hsü Cho-yün, clan units [tsu] still actively participated in
the pitched battles of the Spring and Autumn. 154) Ten such companies
probably comprised a shih, which was basically an army of one thousand
men; in fact, the term shih should be considered synonymous with
“army” in this period.155 The word normally translated as “army”—
chün—does not appear until the Spring and Autumn.156
   Early Western Chou military organization would have been essentially
the same, but with the units definitely chariot-centered. As already noted,
the three thousand famous Tiger Warriors at the epoch-making battle of
Mu-yeh would appropriately work out to a ratio of ten men per chariot.
Thereafter, the infantry expanded as the number associated with each
chariot gradually increased, until by the early Spring and Autumn the
ratio was perhaps twenty, twenty-two, or even thirty foot soldiers per
vehicle.157 In the Spring and Autumn period—the classic age of chariot
warfare depicted in the Tso chuan—the systematic grouping of men into
squads of five, with a vertical hierarchy mapped out on multiples of five,
seems to have developed and become prevalent.158 This is the period
described by passages in several of the Military Classics and the Chouli,
during which seventy-two infantrymen accompanied each chariot,
deployed in three platoons characterized as left, center, and right. (These
designations were nominal; actual positioning depended on their
function. For example, on easy terrain the center platoon would follow
the chariot, whereas on difficult terrain it would precede it—both as a
defensive measure and to clear obstacles.159) Whether the officers were
included among the one hundred also seems to be a matter of debate.160
  From the Chou li and some of the military writings, the following
chart can be constructed, with rough Western equivalents as indicated:




The Western equivalents are relative; their definition depends on the era
and country of organization.161 The columns represent a set of
alternatives, so that if regiment is used for lü, then brigade (or perhaps
division) should be used for shih. The term lü is an ancient one; it was
originally used by the Shang to designate a military unit that reportedly
expanded to ten thousand for one campaign, but it also may have
referred to the standing army.162 Subsequently, in the Spring and
Autumn and Warring States periods, it was combined with the character
for army—chün—as chün-lü to indicate the army or military units in
general. In its original meaning, it apparently referred to “men serving
under a flag.”
  As already noted, the term for army—chün—appeared only in the
Spring and Autumn and then only in the central states because the
peripheral states, such as Ch’u, had their own distinct forms of
organization.163 The term “Three Armies” (san chün) encountered
throughout the military texts normally refers to the army in general, not
just to three units of army strength according to the above chart.164
Early Chou theory asserted that the king alone had the right to maintain
six armies (shih); a great feudal lord, three armies; lesser lords, two
armies; and the least of them, one army. All of the vassal armies could
and would be called on to supplement the royal forces and support the
dynasty in the military campaigns that were generally mounted to
suppress either rebellious states or nomadic peoples. With the rise of the
hegemons in the Spring and Autumn period, states such as Chin simply
disregarded both the Chou house and its prerogatives, eventually fielding
as many as six armies.165
   In the earliest stage of the Shang and Chou, force size was apparently
irregular; it was enumerated, constituted, and organized to meet the
situation and the demand. However, with the vastly augmented scope of
conflict in the Warring States and the imposition of universal service
obligations, military hierarchy and discipline became essential, as is
evident from the emphasis on them in the Seven Military Classics.
Actual service demands made on the newly registered populace also
increased from the Spring and Autumn into the Warring States; at first,
only a single male in each family was required to serve, then all males
were so required. This mirrored early Chou trends when all the people
who dwelled within the state (kuo) trained and were obligated to fight
but were universally mobilized in only the most dire circumstances.166
With the creation and imposition of hierarchical administrative systems
for the populace (both variants—the village and district—began late in
the Spring and Autumn in Chin and Ch’u, perhaps originating with Kuan
Chung), the male population could be quickly summoned for active duty.
The village and district groups of five and twenty-five were immediately
translated into squads and platoons. Local officials at all levels would
immediately become officers at the respective unit level, although there
were professional military personnel for the higher ranks and a standing
army to form the army’s core.167 This meant that the total qualified
populace could be mobilized for military campaigns, and that virtually
an entire country could go to war.168
                            Introduction




OF THE Seven-Military Classics only Sun-tzu’s Military Strategy,
traditionally known as the Art of War, has received much exposure in the
West. First translated by a French missionary roughly two hundred years
ago, it was reportedly studied and effectively employed by Napoleon and
possibly by certain members of the Nazi High Command. For two
thousand years it remained the most important military treatise in Asia,
known at least by name even to the common people. Chinese, Japanese,
and Korean military theorists and professional soldiers have all studied it,
and many of the strategies played a significant role in Japan’s storied
military history, commencing about the eighth century A.D.1 Over the
millennia the book’s concepts have stimulated intense debate and
vehement philosophical discussion, commanding the attention of
significant figures in all realms. Although rendered into English numerous
times, with the translations of Giles2 and Griffith 3 still being widely
available, further translations continue to appear. Some of these are merely
versions of Giles, acknowledged or otherwise, under a different cover,
while others represent entirely new works.4
   The Art of War has long been recognized as China’s oldest and most
profound military treatise, all other works being relegated to secondary
status at best. Traditionalists attribute the book to the historical Sun Wu,
who is portrayed in the Shih chi and Spring and Autumn Annals of Wu and
Yüeh as active in the last years of the sixth century, beginning about 512
B.C. In their view the book preserves his strategic and tactical concepts
and principles and should therefore be dated to this period. Over the ages,
however, more skeptical scholars have questioned the work’s authenticity,
citing certain historical discrepancies and anachronisms to justify their
positions. Although all the arguments have varying degrees of merit and
credibility, and will be separately considered at the end of the introduction,
the most extreme not only deny Sun Wu’s military role, but even his very
existence. The critical element in their argument is the absence of any
material in the Tso chuan, the classic record of the period’s political
events, which would confirm Sun Wu’s existence and corroborate his
strategic role in the wars between Wu and Yüeh as preserved in the Shih
chi biography.5
   The Shih chi, famous throughout Asia as China’s first true history and a
literary masterpiece, includes several biographies devoted to distinguished
military strategists and generals, including Sun-tzu.6 However, the Spring
and Autumn Annals of Wu and Yüeh recount a very similar but somewhat
more interesting version of Sun Wu’s career and experiences:
       In the third year of King Ho-lü’s reign Wu’s generals wanted to
       attack Ch’u, but no action was taken. Wu Tzu-hsü7 and Po P’i8
       spoke with each other: “We nurture officers and make plans on
       behalf of the king. These strategies will be advantageous to the
       state, and for this reason the king should attack Ch’u. But he has
       put off issuing the orders, and does not have any intention to
       mobilize the army. What should we do?”
          After a while the King of Wu queried Wu Tzu-hsü and Po P’i: “I
       want to send forth the army. What do you think?” Wu-tzu Hsü and
       Po P’i replied: “We would like to receive the order.” The King of
       Wu secretly thought the two of them harbored great enmity for
       Ch’u. He was deeply afraid that they would take the army out only
       to be exterminated. He mounted his tower, faced into the southern
       wind and groaned. After a while he sighed. None of his ministers
understood the king’s thoughts. Wu Tzu-hsü secretly realized the
king would not decide, so he recommended Sun-tzu to him.

   Sun-tzu, whose name was Wu, was a native of Wu.9 He excelled
at military strategy, but dwelled in secrecy far away from
civilization, so ordinary people did not know of his ability. Wu
Tzu-hsü, himself enlightened, wise, and skilled in discrimination,
knew Sun-tzu could penetrate and destroy the enemy. One morning
when he was discussing military affairs he recommended Sun-tzu
seven times. The king of Wu said: “Since you have found an
excuse to advance this shih, I want to have him brought in.” He
questioned Sun-tzu about military strategy, and each time that he
laid out a section of his book the king couldn’t praise him enough.
   Greatly pleased, he inquired: “If possible, I would like a minor
test of your military strategy.” Sun-tzu said: “It’s possible. We can
conduct a minor test with women from the inner palace.” The king
said, “I agree.” Sun-tzu said: “I would like to have two of your
Majesty’s beloved concubines act as company commanders, each
to direct a company.” He ordered all three hundred women to wear
helmets and armor, to carry swords and shields, and stand. He
instructed them in military methods, that in accord with the drum
they should advance, withdraw, go left or right, or turn around. He
had them know the prohibitions and then ordered, “At the first
beating of the drum you should all assemble, at the second
drumming you should advance with your weapons, and at the third
deploy into military formation.” At this the palace women all
covered their mouths and laughed.
   Sun-tzu then personally took up the sticks and beat the drums,
giving the orders three times, and explaining them five times. They
laughed as before. Sun-tzu saw that the women laughed
continuously, and wouldn’t stop.
   Sun-tzu was enraged, his eyes suddenly opened wide, his sound
was like a terrifying tiger, his hair stood on end under his cap, and
his neck broke the tassels at the side. He said to the Master of
Laws, “Get the executioner’s axes.”
  Sun-tzu [then] said: “If the instructions are not clear, if the
explanations and orders are not trusted, it is the general’s offense.
When they have already been instructed three times, and the orders
explained five times, if the troops still do not perform, it is the fault
of the officers. According to the rescripts for military discipline,
what is the procedure?” The Master of Laws said: “Decapitation!”
Sun-tzu then ordered the beheading of the two company
commanders, the king’s favorite concubines.10
   The King of Wu ascended his platform to observe just when
they were about to behead his beloved concubines. He had an
official hasten down to them with orders to say, “I already know
the general is able to command forces. Without these two
concubines my food will not be sweet. It would be appropriate not
to behead them.”
  Sun-tzu said: “I have already received my commission as
commanding general. According to the rules for generals, when I,
as a general, am in command of the army even though you issue
orders to me, I do not [have to] accept them.” [He then had them
beheaded.]
   He again beat the drum, and they went left and right, advanced
and withdrew, and turned around in accord with the prescribed
standards without daring to blink an eye. The two companies were
silent, not daring to look around. Thereupon Sun-tzu reported to
the King of Wu: “The army is already well ordered. I would like
your Majesty to observe them. However you might want to employ
them, even sending them forth into fire and water, will not present
any difficulty. They can be used to settle All under Heaven.”
   The King of Wu was suddenly displeased. He said: “I know that
you excel at employing the army. Even though I can thereby
become a hegemon, there is no place to exercise them. General,
please dismiss the army and return to your dwelling. I am
unwilling to act further.”
  Sun-tzu said: “Your Majesty only likes the words, he isn’t able
to realize their substance.” Wu Tzu-hsü remonstrated: “I have
heard that the army is an inauspicious affair11 and can not be
wantonly tested. Thus if one forms an army but does not go forth
to launch a punitive attack, then the military Tao will be unclear.
Now if Your Majesty sincerely seeks talented shih and wants to
mobilize the army to execute the brutal state of Ch’u, become
       hegemon of All under Heaven, and overawe the feudal lords, if you
       do not employ Sun-tzu as your general, who can ford the Huai,
       cross the Ssu, and traverse a thousand li to engage in battle?”
       Thereupon the King of Wu was elated. He had the drum beaten to
       convene the army’s staff, assembled the troops, and attacked Ch’u.
       Sun-tzu took Shu, killing the two renegade Wu generals, Princes
       Kai-yu and Chu-yung.12
   The Shih chi biography differs from the above version in two
fundamental respects: first, it identifies Sun-tzu as a native of Ch’i rather
than Wu.13 This would place his background in the state that enjoyed the
heritage of the T’ai Kung’s military thought. Accordingly, many
traditional scholars have asserted that he was well versed in the Six Secret
Teachings and similar writings, although it should be noted that the Six
Secret Teachings was probably composed well after Sun-tzu’s Art of War.
Moreover, the state of Ch’i, originally on the periphery of the ancient
Chou political world, was well known for nurturing a diversity of views
and imaginative theories. Since the Art of War clearly reflects many Taoist
conceptions14 and is philosophically sophisticated, he may well have been
a man of Ch’i.
  Second, the Shi chi biography adds a brief description of Sun-tzu’s
achievements: “To the West [the king] defeated the powerful state of Ch’u,
and advanced into Ying. To the north he overawed Ch’i and Chin, and
manifested his name among the feudal lords. This was due to Sun-tzu
imparting power to him.”15 Some military historians have identified Sun
Wu with the campaigns against Ch’u that commenced in 511 B.C., the
year after his initial interview with King Ho-lü. Although he is never
mentioned in any recorded source as having sole command of the troops,
following Wu’s conquest of Ying, the capital of Ch’u, his name
completely disappears. Perhaps he realized the difficulty of surviving
under the unstable political conditions of his time, or possibly feared he
would be executed by the new king, Fu-ch’ai, after becoming entangled in
Po P’i’s machinations, and set an example for later ages by retiring to
obscurity, leaving his work behind. 16
  The view that Sun-tzu simply vanished of his own volition was
commonly held in later centuries, possibly reflecting the famous example
of Fan Li, the great Yüeh strategist and commander who, eschewing
further service despite the impassioned entreaties of King Kou-chien once
Yüeh had completed its lengthy conquest of Wu, willingly set off and
disappeared at sea. The Tung-chou lieh-kuo-chih, a highly popular Ming
dynasty novel closely based upon historical materials from the Eastern
Chou period, romanticizes a similar departure for Sun-tzu:
          When Ho-lü discussed comparative achievement in Ch’u’s
       destruction, he ranked Sun Wu first. Sun Wu was unwilling to
       occupy an official position, so he steadfastly requested permission
       to return to the mountains. The king had Wu Tzu-hsü detain him.
       Sun Wu personally addressed Wu Tzu-hsü “Do you know the Tao
       of Heaven? When summer goes winter comes; after spring returns
       autumn will arrive. The king now relies upon his strength
       flourishing; the four borders are free of worries; arrogance and
       pleasure will inevitably be born. Now when achievements are
       complete, failing to retire will invariably result in later misfortune.
       I am not trying to preserve myself alone, but I also want to
       preserve you.” Wu Tzu-hsü said he didn’t find it to be so. Sun Wu
       subsequently drifted away. Having been presented with several
       carriages of gold and silks, he scattered them all among the
       impoverished common people along his route. Later no one knew
       how he ended up.17
   Sun Wu remains an enigma not only because of the absence of historical
data in the so-called authentic texts of the period, but also because his life
never generated the anecdotes and illustrative stories frequently found
about famous figures in the works of succeeding periods. In contrast, Wu
Ch’i, the extraordinary general and likely progenitor of the Wu-tzu,
became the focus of many incidents in such widely read compilations as
the Shuo yüan, Han-shih wai-chuan, and Lü-shih ch’un-ch’iu, as well as
staid philosophical works like the Han Fei-tzu. Many theories have been
vociferously advanced to explain Sun Wu’s invisibility, chief among them
that most of the credit that was rightly his was attributed to his mentor, Wu
Tzu-hsü, because the latter was more prominent and his life, a living
melodrama writ large, provided a natural focal point for tales of intrigue
and portraits of achievement. Remarkably, among those who deny Sun-
tzu’s very existence, some have advanced the theory that he and Wu Tzu-
hsü were identical, one and the same individual. These and other
inseparable issues will be discussed in a subsequent section on the text and
its dating.
         Historical Background of Ch’u, Wu, and Yüeh

Whether or not Sun-tzu existed, in order to gain a better understanding of
his era—including the nature of warfare, the complexities and astounding
effects of political intrigue, and the significant historical figures with
whom he would have interacted—it is worthwhile to reconstruct many
facets of Spring and Autumn political and economic life and analyze the
battles in which he purportedly served as strategist or commander. The
period overflows with strong personalities, intrigue, murder, and
machination on an extreme scale, creating human drama in which entire
states perished at the whim of a single man. Since Wu Tzu-hsü was a
pivotal figure in the clashes between Ch’u and Wu, and later a forlorn
voice in the destructive wars between Wu and Yüeh, his biography
provides an informative focal point for exploring Sun Wu’s world and era.
   As discussed in the general historical introduction, from its inception
the Chou had an avowed policy of dispatching royal clan groups to both
enemy and unsettled domains. Within a few generations it also began
experiencing pressure from nomadic “barbarian” peoples to the north and
west; therefore, any further activity in the quest for allies, resources, and
political strength tended to be directed toward the south and southeast.
Several Early Chou kings enthusiastically undertook military campaigns to
the south (with mixed results), and King Chao, the fifth to reign, even
perished mysteriously, leading to the frequently repeated charge that Ch’u
had murdered him.18 While members of the Chi and Chiang clans
emigrated to these areas for defensive purposes, the southern offensive
became essentially a cultural one, gradually sinicizing the peoples around
initial Chou enclaves, particularly as they acquired a need for Chou
products and associated technology. Numerous small states proudly
claimed descent from one or another Chou royal family member, and most
at least nominally allied themselves with the Chou, and later with the
stronger northern states that emerged when Chou power visibly declined.
   The Spring and Autumn period witnessed the rise of the great families
and their inevitable, often brutal conflict with the older ruling nobility in
the various domains, as well as the destructive emergence of seven great
states, each reputedly capable of fielding ten thousand chariots. In the
early sixth century the state of Chin had already formed six armies, visibly
usurping a Chou royal prerogative, and was probably capable of
mobilizing seventy-five thousand men if necessary. (These same six
armies, under the direction of individual factions, would later split the
state apart as the six ministerial families contended for ultimate authority.)
Awesome Chin, originally also founded by the Chi clan—the royal house
of Chou—claimed the role of hegemon in officially sustaining the Chou,
coercing the other states into formally recognizing and even sanctifying its
prestigious role.
   Although the central states vigorously contended among themselves for
relative supremacy, they retained a joint sense of identity, consciously
distinguishing themselves from the uncivilized “barbarian” areas and
peoples. Consequently, with both disdain and trepidation they observed the
rapid development of the wild southern areas where the states of Ch’u,
Wu, and Yüh were forming, and also feared the ever less-submissive state
of Ch’in in the old Chou heartland. The south was not only distinctly
different, it also enjoyed numerous advantages. First, the climate was
warmer, resulting in a greater variety of plants, crops, and products.
Second, the longer growing season, coupled with plentiful water
resources, provided the populace with bountiful harvests, including rice.
Third, the area was crisscrossed by rivers, filled with lakes, and dense with
mountains and forests; the latter provided abundant wild life, the former
seafood, to supplement the agricultural diet. A natural bastion that made
chariot-centered land warfare—which was feasible only on the relatively
flat, open land of the northern plains—frequently useless, the terrain
compelled the development of extensive naval forces. These early,
essentially inland navies capitalized upon the indigenous skills that had
evolved to exploit the Yangtze, Han, and Huai rivers, the numerous lakes,
and expansive marshes.19
   Even though there was a natural tension between the original culture of
the central plains area and that of the “wild, uncivilized, and forbidding
south,” the south also enjoyed a virtual monopoly on many resources,
ensuring that the “northern states” could not ignore trade possibilities. For
example, copper mainly derived from the south, and when iron technology
evolved late in the Spring and Autumn period, the main production centers
arose in the southern states. In fact, claims have been advanced that Wu
and Yüeh became prosperous not only through trade, but also because they
were the first states to employ iron tools in agriculture, significantly
increasing the yields. Furthermore, their bronze weapon technology was
spectacularly advanced, with the most famous swords of the era coming
from Wu and Yüeh in the fifth century B.C. 20
       THE THREE STATES AND THEIR CONFLICTS

   The three significant southern states, in the order of their emergence,
were Ch’u, Wu, and Yüeh. Ch’u lay to the south of the northern plains
area, generally in modern day Hupei, Hunan, Honan, and Anhui. While
there were a number of smaller states between it and the “Chinese”
entities, Ch’u’s northern border was basically contiguous with the latter.
   Wu lay to the east of Ch’u, and therefore to the southeast of the northern
states, reaching to the sea. Its capital was in the Suchou area, and it
occupied essentially present Chiangsu province. Yüeh lay to the south of
Wu, largely falling in northern Chechiang, and was the last state to
develop.
   The state of Ch’u—Wu’s nemesis and the object of Wu Tzu-hsü’s and
Sun Wu’s strategy and efforts—was originally a barbarian state, but by the
middle of the Spring and Autumn period it had become largely sinicized.
The government had adopted many of the forms and practices of
“civilization,” including government organization and the li (the rites or
forms of etiquette), although the populace remained a mixture of
indigenous peoples, descendants of original Chou settlers, and later
migrants. Its stronghold was the area between the Yangtze and Han rivers,
with the capital located at Ying. In the seventh century B.C. it had already
become militarily active, subjugating and obliterating various small Chou
states, such as Ts’ai, Shen, and Cheng, with the total annexed or destroyed
eventually rising to more than forty.21 A state marked by an aggressive,
energetic populace, stimulated by terrain and sometimes harsh climatic
conditions, and under often belligerent leadership, its expansionist policies
threatened the northern states, especially Chin, its closest significant
neighbor. By 632 B.C. its immense territory already covered a thousand li.
   In that year—632 B.C.—at the famous great battle of Ch’eng-p’u, the
allied states of Chin, Ch’i, Ch’in, and Sung defeated Ch’u’s army.22 This
forced Ch’u, at least temporarily, to redirect their campaigns of expansion
toward the south and southeast, whereupon they subjugated many smaller
states along the Han River. The direction of this new thrust inevitably
brought them into conflict with the state of Wu, particularly after they
suffered another defeat at the hands of Chin in 575 B.C.
  Even though Chin had been reasonably successful in its ongoing efforts
to contain Ch’u, when confronted by additional threats from Ch’in’s
growing strength in the West, its own internal dissension, and its rapidly
declining prestige, it sought to develop an external counterbalance to
Ch’u’s might. In 584 B.C. Chin therefore dispatched Wu-ch’en, duke of
Shen—a former high-ranking Ch’u official who had fled his native state
for ostensibly political reasons—with 125 Chin warriors and officers and 9
chariots to Wu for the express purpose of introducing the chariot and
instructing them in the land warfare techniques of the northern states.23
Although his visit is generally seen as marking not only a military turning
point, but also, at least symbolically, bringing Wu culturally into the
sphere of the civilized states, in reality Wu’s growing strength no doubt
suggested the constructive possibilities of such a mission.24 The true
impact and overall effectiveness of Wu-ch’en’s instructions are also
debatable, for naval and infantry forces continued to predominate, with
chariots only being sporadically mentioned in the Tso chuan’s accounts of
Wu’s various battles.25 Since Wu’s important attacks against Ch’u
required launching along water routes, or at least fording extensive rivers,
boats were inevitably required for transport; therefore the number of
cumbersome chariots that could be conveyed would be limited, and
infantry units invariably played the focal role.
  The state of Wu claimed an antiquity even greater than the Chou itself,
having supposedly been founded by the eldest son of King T’ai, who,
being disinclined to inherit the throne, had fled to the south.26 The
indigenous peoples in the Wu and Yüeh region were known for having
short hair and tatooing their bodies, perhaps because their lifestyle was
closely connected with water activities.27 Since much of Wu occupied an
alluvial plain formed by the Yang-tze River, it lacked more than small
hills, but approximately 15 percent of its land area was wet, consisting of
marshes, rivers, lakes, and ponds. In 585 B.C. Shou-meng became the first
ruler to assume the title of king, styling himself as the “king of Wu.” This
marked another step toward the more formal administrative style found in
the north, and also constituted a blatant effort to increase his prestige. (The
northern states, while also witnessing the birth of additional “kings,” still
had many states governed only by “dukes” and lesser royalty. The Chou
king alone theoretically merited and inherited the right to such a grand
title.)
  The duke of Shen’s diplomatic mission marked two important
developments: he was the first “guest advisor” to be honored in Wu,
commencing a practice that would later see Wu Tzu-hsü and Sun Wu gain
employment, and his visit entangled it in an alliance with Chin, thereby
confirming its future enmity with Ch’u. Although Wu did not receive
formal Chou recognition until 576 B.C., clashes between Ch’u and Wu
immediately began in 584 B.C. as the former sought to expand into the
region between them, while the latter mounted its initial preemptive strike
against Ch’u’s subordinate state of Hsü. Thereafter, clashes continued at
least every few years for the next six decades as the two states strove to
dominate the region.
   During this initial period Wu emerged victorious from every significant
encounter, greatly blunting Ch’u’s power and curtailing its influence.
These repeated defeats forced Ch’u to constantly reassess its military
organization and methods, bringing about pauses in the hostilities for up to
five years while Ch’u sought to rebuild and retrain its forces. Most of the
attacks were launched by water routes and featured naval engagements
followed by limited land assaults. In virtually every case Wu was better
prepared and therefore managed either to stop and eventually rout the
Ch’u forces, or to employ subterfuge and stratagems to turn the tide.
Whenever a ruler died or another destabilizing opportunity presented itself
in one state, the other state would quickly launch an attack, although Wu
again proved more successful in exploiting such transitory possibilities.
  As the decades passed, Wu commenced increasingly aggressive actions
against Ch’u’s cities, forcing Ch’u (from 538 B.C. on) to undertake
massive defensive preparations, including the construction of walled cities
and other fortifications.28 Wu also constantly benefited from Ch’u
brutally suppressing the various minority peoples and smaller states in the
region, easily finding numerous allies and local support among them. By
exploiting the sense of common identity fostered by confronting a mutual
enemy, Wu was able to draw upon them for material support, local guides,
and field intelligence. For example in 537 B.C. Ch’u mounted a large-
scale attack in conjunction with several of its subordinate states and
assistance from Yüeh (marking the latter’s first conflict with Wu), only to
suffer a defeat. Later in the same year Ch’u again attempted an advance,
but withdrew after finding Wu fully prepared for their invasion.
Consequently, Ch’u grew increasingly weaker, having dissipated its people
and resources in futile efforts to dominate Wu, and was spared even
further distress only because Wu engaged the great northern state of Ch’i
in battle in 521 B.C. and suffered the temporarily crippling loss of two full
armies.29
  Chinese military historians examining this initial period tend to draw
several conclusions about the nature of the two states and their conflict.30
First of all, before Ch’u directed its attention toward Wu—primarily
because it wanted to expand and thereby encircle the northern states, but
also because it was constrained by the north—engagements were between
the single state of Ch’u and members of the Chou alliance. However, once
it redirected its focus toward the Huai River basin area, the nature of
warfare changed to engagements between two single states contending
over territory populated by various, unintegrated peoples. Ch’u’s previous
military experience had been limited to chariot-centered land warfare;
although it possessed naval forces, its members were not well practiced in
the requisite underlying skills or their employment in combat. It appears
that assimilating land warfare methods proved easier and more successful
for Wu than Ch’u’s attempts to adopt naval measures. Despite Ch’u’s
theoretical inherent advantage in moving downstream to engage Wu
forces, they amassed an abysmal battle record.31
   The respective populaces, styles of government, and general policies of
the two states also displayed distinctive characteristics. For example, even
allowing for archetypal distortion, Ch’u’s leadership seems to have been
remarkably brutal, suppressing not only external peoples, but also
exhausting and exploiting the energies of its own inhabitants. The
demands of incessant military activity imposed heavy burdens on the
populace both in terms of material resources (various taxes and
impositions) and the (often unwilling) supply of manpower. Their
government seems to have suffered more than other states from frequent
intrigues while the rulers distinguished themselves by emulating the last
Shang dynasty king, constructing extravagant pleasure facilities that
further debilitated the people and interfered with the agricultural seasons.
(These and other themes merit note not only because of their inherent
veracity and impact, but also because they became pivotal doctrines in the
military and philosophical writings of the time.32) The leadership also
seems to have been muddled, lacking direction as well as a clear
recognition of their goals when engaging Wu in battle.
  Conversely, Wu was a younger state marked by a growing self-
consciousness, one generally governed by dynamic leaders who largely
avoided the pitfalls of extravagance and debauchery. Instead of exploiting
and exhausting the people, its kings generally fostered policies to nurture
them, increase the population, and stimulate productivity. Throughout their
numerous military campaigns Wu’s warriors seem to have been more
courageous, more spirited and energetic, able to endure great difficulties
and turn defeat into victory. Its leadership also seems to have been more
unified, no doubt largely accounting for their ability to respond quickly.
Realizing that they would be outnumbered in virtually every clash with
Ch’u armies, they had to create imaginative tactics and consistently avoid
any frontal, brute-force confrontation that could decimate their numbers.
Consequently their attacks stressed speed and mobility, frequently
employed deceit and clever stratagems, and focused upon frustrating the
enemy’s plans and movements—all cardinal principles found in the Art of
War. In many cases Wu mounted such formidable defenses that when the
Ch’u armies arrived they couldn’t detect any weakness to attack. Clearly
Wu’s pre-Sun-tzu efforts exemplified and perhaps furnished the historical
basis for several pivotal teachings from the Art of War, such as
         Subjugating the enemy’s army without fighting is the true
       pinnacle of excellence.33
         The strategy for employing the army is not to rely on their not
       coming, but to depend upon us having the means to await them. Do
       not rely on them not attacking, but depend upon us having an
       unassailable position.34
         When someone excels at defense the enemy does not know
       where to attack. . . . If I do not want to engage in combat, even
       though I merely draw a line upon the ground and defend it, they
       will not be able to engage me in battle because we thwart his
       movements.35
Roughly a century later the great general Wu Ch’i analyzed Ch’u’s
character for Marquis Wu of Wei. His remarks are apparently preserved in
the chapter entitled “Evaluating the Enemy” in the Wu-tzu:
       Ch’u’s character is weak, its lands broad, its government troubling
       [to the people], and its people weary. Thus while they are well-
       ordered, they do not long maintain their positions. The way to
       attack them is to suddenly strike and cause chaos in the
       encampments. First snatch away their ch’i—lightly advancing and
       then quickly retreating, tiring and laboring them, never actually
       joining battle with them. Then their army can be defeated.


                      THE BATTLE OF CHI-FU

   The last major battle between Ch’u and Wu before Sun Wu assumed his
advisory role in Wu occurred in 519 B.C. around Chi-fu, well within Ch’u
territory on the northeastern side of the mountain range falling between
Ch’u in the west and Wu in the east. Ch’u’s defeat resulted in significant
consequences: the peoples dwelling in the disputed region between the
two states, as well as those that had already been annexed by Ch’u in the
north and east, realized that while Ch’u continued to repress and hold them
in bondage, it could not defend them against Wu’s strength. Feeling
vulnerable to Wu’s incursions and generally filled with hatred for Ch’u’s
ruler, they increasingly turned their hopes and even allegiance to Wu.
   Second, this clash is an example of the “few defeating the many, the
weak overcoming the strong,” as advocated in Sun-tzu’s writings.
Although Wu apparently ferried some chariots upriver with their naval and
infantry forces, they were vastly outnumbered by Ch’u’s land-based
armies. Therefore they were compelled to (deceitfully) rouse the enemy
into movement and take advantage of the ensuing confusion and disorder,
as well as the terrain, to startle, terrorize, and strike them. In these efforts
they proved enormously successful, no doubt due to the quality of their
military intelligence.
   Convinced that Ch’u was becoming a much greater threat, King Liao of
Wu, together with the future King Ho-lü (who proved a brilliant
commander throughout), decided to launch a preemptive strike rather than
passively await Ch’u’s next aggressive act. For roughly five years each
side had been nurturing its forces, so their strength levels were at
maximum. When Ch’u learned of Wu’s final preparations they hurriedly
coerced six smaller allied states into joining with them in a coordinated
campaign under Ch’u’s general command. The armies assembled at Chi-fu
in preparation for moving against the Wu forces laying siege to Chou-lai.
Wu’s armies, under Ho-lü’s command, anticipating that Ch’u’s
overwhelming forces would effect the town’s rescue, discontinued the
siege and withdrew somewhat to occupy more favorable terrain and await
the onslaught (probably on the principle “with the rested await the tired”).
However, en route Ch’u’s commander-in-chief fell ill and died,
immediately throwing their central command into turmoil. Since his
replacement was decidedly less capable and the officers and soldiers
generally felt his death to be an ill omen, they were disorganized and
clearly dispirited. Once Wu learned of these developments and the state of
their morale, they naturally decided to exploit these weaknesses.36
   Wu’s tactics proved to be both brilliant and inventive. First, they
targeted the armies of the coerced states as their primary objective on the
premise that they would be little inclined to fight for a hated overlord and
the recognition that their commanders had little respect for the new
commander-in-chief. Second, they decided to attack on the last day of the
lunar calendar, traditionally a time when armies remained docilely
encamped because they feared undertaking military activities when the
balance of yin and yang became so clearly inauspicious. 37 Third, they
deliberately disrupted Ch’u’s defensive posture by employing an advance
attack force of three thousand ill-trained convicts, knowing that even
under conditions of total surprise they would probably be repulsed, panic,
and flee, drawing out the defenders in a wildly disorganized pursuit.
   The battle proceeded as envisioned, as forces from three of the six state
armies (which had been entrusted with defending the center of the forward
perimeter behind which Ch’u’s main army was encamped) rushed forward
into Wu’s well-prepared ambush. The Wu armies deployed on the left and
right then fervently attacked, while their main force, concealed directly
ahead of the onrushing Ch’u troops, launched the main thrust, completely
enveloping the enemy. Incredible chaos ensued, with the majority of the
alliances’s soldiers being killed or captured, and the rulers of the three
states being summarily executed. Their executions, very deliberately
performed and visibly staged, further increased the panic of the surviving
soldiers, many of whom were then allowed to flee, as if by accident, in
order to sow the seeds of chaos among the three remaining perimeter
armies.
   Coincident with the returning onslaught of allied troops, Wu launched a
coordinated attack against the three still emplaced state armies. As
anticipated, they quickly buckled under the combined pressures of external
assault and internal turbulence, panicking as they became engulfed in the
turmoil. They naturally fled in an uncontrolled rout, only to directly
collide with the main Ch’u army, which, although not yet deployed into
fighting formation, had begun to advance. The unimaginable chaos
combined with the sheer weight of numbers no doubt prevented them from
ever assuming any attack posture, and the rout quickly became a total
defeat. Wu’s victory marked the first incursion and occupation of Ch’u
territory by any state. It also exposed Ch’u to the threat of future invasion,
for only three routes existed for penetrating the interior of Ch’u because of
the numerous mountains and dense forests protecting it to the east and
north.


              THE BIOGRAPHY OF WU TZU-HSÜ

   Shortly after this great battle, Wu Tzu-hsü was forced to emigrate from
Ch’u to Wu by the machinations of a corrupt and evil official, Fei Wu-chi.
Remarkably, King Liao of Wu deemed him a worthy individual and
despite his origins and background in Ch’u, appointed him to a central
position. Thereafter he became an influential advisor to King Ho-lü,
successor to King Liao, and was instrumental in creating Wu’s great power
and fashioning the strategy for the final great invasion of Ch’u. However,
before reconstructing the battle for Ying and analyzing the various tactical
principles employed, it is appropriate to present Wu Tzu-hsü’s dramatic
biography from the Shih chi as it provides a portrait of the principal
characters and the politics of the era:38
Battle of Chi-fus
Inflall positions and first feint by Wu.
Chi-fu, Second Flasee
Conviet force flees; forces of three weak states pursur onto ambush zone
wu’s center army artachs, Manks envelop Ch’u force.
       Wu Tzu-hsü, a native of Ch’u, was named Yün. Yün’s father was
       called Wu She; Yün’s older brother was called Wu Shang. Their
       ancestor, called Wu Chü, had served King Chuang of Ch’u with his
       direct remonstrances and thereby become illustrious. Thus his
       descendants were famous in Ch’u.
          The Heir apparent to King P’ing of Ch’u was his son Chien. He
       employed Wu She as Grand Mentor, and Fei Wu-chi as Junior
       Mentor. Wu-chi was not loyal to Heir Apparent Chien. King P’ing
       dispatched Wu-chi to Ch’in to obtain a wife for the Heir
       Apparent.39 The woman of Ch’in was beautiful, so Wu-chi raced
       back to report to King P’ing: “The Ch’in woman is absolutely
       beautiful. Your majesty can take her for himself, and then select
       another woman for the Heir Apparent.” King P’ing subsequently
       took the Ch’in woman for himself and exceedingly loved and
favored her. She gave birth to a son, Chen. Then he obtained
another woman for the Heir Apparent.




Chi-fu,Thld Flases
Testor-stricken remnants of Hu,Shen,and Ch’en flee in chaos bart
into hours of Ch’u and the other small states—Ch’u is rouled onder
che cruls
  Because he had already pleased King P’ing with the woman of
Ch’in, Wu-chi abandoned the Heir Apparent and served the king.
Fearing that one day King P’ing would die and the Heir Apparent,
once established, would kill him, he slandered Heir Apparent
Chien. Chien’s mother, a woman of Ts’ai,40 did not enjoy King
P’ing’s favor. King P’ing gradually distanced himself from Chien,
and had Chien undertake the defense of Ch’engfu, preparing the
border troops [against incursions].
   A little later Wu-chi again began to speak day and night about
the Heir Apparent’s shortcomings to the king: “Because of the
woman of Ch’in the Heir Apparent can not be without animosity. I
would like your majesty to prepare himself somewhat. The Heir
Apparent dwells in Ch’eng-fu and commands the troops while
externally establishing relationships with the feudal lords; surely
he wants to enter [the state] and mount a rebellion.” King P’ing
thereupon summoned Grand Mentor Wu She and interrogated him.
Wu She knew that Wu-chi had slandered the Heir Apparent to
King P’ing, so he said: “How is it that your majesty, on account of
a slanderous and villainous minor official, estranges himself from
his relatives of bone and flesh?” Wu-chi said: “If your majesty
does not now take control of the situation the [rebellious] affair
will be accomplished! Moreover, your majesty will be captured.”
Thereupon King P’ing, being angered, imprisoned Wu She and had
Fen Yang, the Ssu-ma (Commander) for Ch’eng-fu, go out to kill
the Heir Apparent. Before his forces arrived Fen Yang had a man
first announce to the Heir Apparent: “You must urgently depart;
otherwise we will execute you.” Heir Apparent Chien escaped by
fleeing to the state of Sung.
   Wu-chi spoke to King P’ing: “Wu She has two sons, both
worthies. If you do not execute them they will cause trouble for
Ch’u. You can summon them by using their father as a hostage;
otherwise they will cause disaster for Ch’u.” The king had an
emissary address Wu She: “If you can bring in your two sons you
will live; if you are unable to do so then you will die.” Wu She
said: [My son] Shang’s character is benevolent. If I call he will
certainly come. Yün’s character is hard and stubborn, and able to
endure disgrace. He is capable of accomplishing great affairs.41
When he sees that if he comes in he will also be captured, under
such circumstances he certainly will not come.” The king didn’t
listen, but had men summon the two sons, saying: “If you come, I
will let your father live; if you don’t come, today I will kill Wu
She.”
   Wu Shang wanted to go. Wu Tzu-hsü said: “The king hasn’t
summoned us two brothers because he wants to keep our father
alive, but because he fears that those who escape will later cause
disaster. Thus he uses our father as a hostage to deceitfully
summon his two sons. When the two of us arrive, we will die
together with our father. Of what advantage will this be to our
father’s death? Our going would make it impossible to avenge our
grievance. It would be better to flee to some other state and borrow
their strength to wipe away our father’s shame. If we are all
exterminated there will be no one to act.”
   Wu Shang said: “I know that even if we go, in the end we will
be unable to preserve our father’s life. Yet I hate it that, in seeking
to live, our father summons us but we do not go. Later, if we are
unable to wipe away the shame, in the end all the world will laugh
at us.” Addressing Wu Tzu-hsü he said: “You can run away! You
will be able to avenge the grievances of father and son; I will
return to die.”
   Shang then submitted to custody. The emissary [tried to] detain
Wu Tzu-sü. Wu Tzu-hsü fully drew his bow and pointed the arrow
toward the emissary. The emissary did not dare advance; Wu Tzu-
hsü then fled. He heard that Chien, the Heir Apparent, was in
Sung, so he went to follow him. When Wu She heard about Tzu-
hsü’s escape he said: “The ruler and ministers of Ch’u will soon
suffer the bitterness of warfare!” After Wu Shang arrived in Ch’u,
the king killed both She and Shang.
   After Wu Tzu-hsü arrived in Sung the state experienced the
turbulence of the Hua clan [revolt], so with Heir Apparent Chien
he fled to Cheng. The people of Cheng treated them exceptionally
well. Heir Apparent Chien also went on to Chin where Duke
Ch’ing of Chin said: “You are already well treated in Cheng, and
the people of Cheng trust you. If you can mount a response from
within on our behalf when we attack from without, Cheng’s
destruction will be certain! If we extinguish Cheng I will enfeoff
you.” The Heir Apparent then returned to Cheng. The affair had
not yet been accomplished when it happened that for some
personal reason he wanted to kill [one of] his followers. This
follower knew of his plans so he informed Cheng of them. Duke
Ting of Cheng, together with Tzuch’an, executed Heir Apparent
Chien.
  Chien had a son called Sheng. Wu Tzu-hsü was afraid, so he fled
with Sheng to Wu. When they reached Chao Pass, [the guards]
wanted to detain him. Wu Tzu-hsü and Sheng each escaped alone
on foot, almost not getting away.42 Wu Tzu-hsü’s pursuers were
right behind him. When he reached the Yangtze river there was a
fisherman in a boat who realized Wu Tzu-hsü’s extremity and
ferried him across. When they had already crossed he unfastened
his sword and said: “This sword is worth a hundred pieces of gold.
I present it to you.” The fisherman said: “According to the laws of
Ch’u anyone who catches you will be granted fifty thousand pieces
of grain and the rank of Jade Baton Holder, not just a sword worth
a hundred pieces of gold!” He did not accept it.43 When Wu Tzu-
hsü had not yet reached Wu he fell ill and halted along the way to
beg for food.44 When he reached Wu, King Liao had just gained
power and Prince Kuang was the commanding general. Wu Tzu-
hsü then sought an audience with the King of Wu through Prince
Kuang.
   Some time thereafter King P’ing of Ch’u became enraged
because two women from the border towns of Chung-li in Ch’u
and the Pei-liang clan in Wu, both silkworm producers, had
attacked each other over a mulberry tree. It reached the point
where the two states mobilized troops to attack each other. Wu had
Prince Kuang attack Ch’u; he returned after seizing their towns of
Chung-li and Chü-ch’ao.
   Wu Tzu-hsü exercised his persuasion on King Liao of Wu,
saying: “Ch’u can be destroyed. I request that you again dispatch
Prince Kuang.” Prince Kuang addressed the king of Wu: “This Wu
Tzu-hsü’s father and elder brother were murdered by Ch’u. Thus
he encourages your majesty to attack Ch’u because he wants to
gain revenge for their grievances. An attack on Ch’u would not yet
destroy them.” Wu Hsü knew that Prince Kuang harbored a hidden
ambition to kill the king and establish himself [on the throne].
Since he could not yet persuade him to undertake external affairs,
he introduced [the future assassin] Chuan Chu to Prince Kuang,
retiring to plow the fields with Sheng, the Heir Apparent’s son.
   Five years later King P’ing of Ch’u died. In the beginning the
woman of Ch’in who the king had taken from Heir Apparent Chien
gave birth to a son, Chen. When King P’ing died Chen was finally
established as his successor, becoming King Chao. King Liao of
Wu, taking advantage of Ch’u’s mourning, dispatched two princes
in command of the army to go forth and strike Ch’u. Ch’u
mobilized its troops and cut off the rear of Wu’s forces, so they
were unable to return. Wu’s interior was empty, so after Prince
Kuang had Chuan Chu suddenly stab King Liao, he ascended the
throne himself as King Ho-lü of Wu.45 Once enthroned as Ho-lü,
now that he had attained his ambition, he summoned Wu Tzu-hsü
to serve as a protocol officer for foreign envoys and plan state
affairs with him.
  Ch’u executed its chief ministers Hsi Yüan and Po Chou-li. Po
Chou-li’s grandson, Po P’i46 fled to Wu, and Wu also established
him as a high official. Earlier the troops King Liao had dispatched
under the command of the two princes to attack Ch’u had had their
route cut off and couldn’t return home. Later, when they heard that
Ho-lü had assassinated King Liao and established himself as king
they surrendered with their troops to Ch’u. Ch’u then enfeoffed
them at Shu.
   When Ho-lü had ruled for three years he mobilized the army and
with Wu Tzu-hsü and Po P’i attacked Ch’u, taking Shu and going
on to capture the two turncoat Wu generals. Then he wanted to
proceed to Ying [the capital], but general Sun Wu said: “The
people are weary. It’s not yet possible; still wait a while.” Then
they returned.
   In his fourth year Wu attacked Ch’u seizing Liu and Ch’ien. In
the fifth year he attacked Yüeh and defeated it. In the sixth year
King Chao of Ch’u had Prince Nang Wa command the troops in an
attack on Wu. Wu had Wu Tzu-hsü respond with a counterstrike;
he extensively destroyed Ch’u’s army at Yü-chang and seized
Ch’u’s city of Chü-ch’ao.
  In his ninth year King Ho-lü of Wu addressed Wu Tzu-hsü and
Sun Wu: “In the beginning you said that Ying could not yet be
invaded. Now, after all, what about it?” The two of them replied:
“Ch’u’s general Nang Wa is greedy while [the small states of]
T’ang and Ts’ai both bear animosity toward him.47 If you really
want to mount a major attack against Ch’u, you must first gain [the
support of] T’ang and Ts’ai before it will be possible.” Ho-lü
listened [to their advice] and together with T’ang and Ts’ai fully
mobilized the army to attack Ch’u. Their combined forces and
Ch’u’s army both deployed close upon either side of the Han River.
The king of Wu’s younger brother, Fu-kai, in command of his
troops, requested permission to accompany him, but the king
would not listen.48 Thereupon with his five thousand men he
struck Ch’u’s general Tzu-ch’ang (Nang Wa). Tzu-ch’ang was
defeated and fled, running off to Cheng. Wu then took advantage
of the victory to advance, and after five battles reached Ying. On
the day chi-mao King Chao of Ch’u fled. On keng-ch’en [one day
later] the king of Wu entered Ying.
   When King Chao was fleeing he entered [the marshes of] Yün-
meng. Brigands suddenly attacked the king, so he raced off to Yün.
The duke of Yün’s younger brother Huai said: “King P’ing killed
our father. If we kill his son, wouldn’t it be appropriate!” The duke
of Yün was afraid his younger brother would kill the king, so he
fled with him to Sui. Troops from Wu besieged Sui, and then
addressed the populace: “The sons and grandsons of the Chou
along the Han River have all been exterminated by Ch’u.”49 The
people of Sui wanted to kill the king, but Prince Ch’i hid him and
disguised himself like the king in order to substitute for him. The
people of Sui divined about whether to hand the king over to Wu,
but it was not auspicious to do so. They therefore declined Wu’s
demand and did not turn over the king.
   In the beginning Wu Tzu-hsü had known Shen Pao-hsü. When
Wu Tzu-hsü fled he said to Shen Pao-hsü “I must overturn Ch’u.”
Pao-hsü said: “I must preserve it.” When Wu’s troops entered
Ying, Wu Tzu-hsü sought out King Chao. Since he could not get
him he dug up King P’ing’s funeral mound, disinterred the corpse,
and whipped it three hundred blows before stopping. Shen Pao-
hsü, having fled to the mountains, had a man say to Tzu-hsü: “Your
revenge is far too excessive! I have heard that if masses of men
overcome Heaven, Heaven certainly can also destroy men. Now
you are King P’ing’s former subject. You yourself faced north to
serve him, but today you treat a dead man contemptuously. Isn’t
this the extremity of lacking the Tao of Heaven?” Wu Tzu-hsü
said: “Please apologize to Shen Pao-hsü on my behalf, saying ‘For
me the day was late and the road far, so I contravened normal
actions and employed contrary measures.’”
  Thereupon Shen Pao-hsü fled to Ch’in to announce [Ch’u’s]
extremity and seek aid from Ch’in. When Ch’in did not grant it,
Pao-hsü stood in the Ch’in court, crying aloud day and night, his
sound unbroken for seven days. Duke Ai of Ch’in took pity on
him, saying: “Even though Ch’u behaved immorally, since it has a
minister such as this, how can we not preserve it?” Then he
dispatched five hundred chariots to rescue Ch’u and strike Wu. In
the sixth month they defeated Wu’s troops at Chi.
   It happened that the king of Wu had long remained in Ch’u
seeking King Chao while his younger brother Fu-kai had fled and
returned [to Wu], and established himself as king. When Ho-lü
heard about it he released Ch’u and returned, mounting a sudden
strike against his younger brother Fu-kai. Fu-kai fled in defeat, and
subsequently raced into Ch’u. When King Chao of Ch’u saw that
Wu suffered from internal turbulence, he again entered [his capital
of] Ying. He enfeoffed Fu-kai at T’ang-ch’i where he assumed the
clan name of T’ang-ch’i. Ch’u again engaged Wu in battle and
defeated them. The king of Wu returned home.
   Two years later Ho-lü had Fu-ch’ai, the Heir Apparent,
command the troops in an attack on Ch’u, seizing P’an. Ch’u
feared that Wu would again come in great strength so they
abandoned Ying and moved [the capital] to Jo. At this time the
state of Wu, employing the strategies of Wu Tzu-hsü and Sun Wu,
had destroyed the strong state of Ch’u to the west, overawed Ch’i
and Chin to the north, and forced the people of Yüeh in the south
to submit.

   Four years later Confucius was made minister in Lu.50 Four
years thereafter they attacked Yüeh. King Kou-chien of Yüeh
mounted a counterattack and defeated Wu at Ku-su, injuring Ho-
lü’s toe.51 Wu’s army withdrew. King Ho-lü, who had fallen ill
from his wound and was about to die, addressed Heir Apparent Fu-
ch’ai: “Will you forget that Kou-chien killed your father?” Fu-ch’ai
replied: “I would not dare forget it.” That evening Ho-lü died. Fu-
ch’ai was then enthroned as king; appointed Po P’i as Grand
Steward; and practiced warfare and archery.
   Two years later he attacked Yüeh, defeating Yüeh at Fuchiao.
Kou-chien, king of Yüeh, with his remaining five thousand troops
ensconced himself on the heights of K’uai-chi, and had the ta-fu
[high official] Chung dispatched with generous gifts to seek peace
through Wu’s Grand Steward P’i, offering to subordinate his state,
like a subject or wife, to Wu. The king of Wu was about to give his
assent when Wu Tzu-hsü remonstrated with him: “The king of
Yüeh’s character is such that he is capable of enduring hardship. If
your majesty does not exterminate him you will certainly regret it
later.” The king of Wu did not listen, but instead employed the
Grand Steward’s plans, making peace with Yüeh.
   Five years later the king of Wu heard that Duke Ching of Ch’i
had died and that the great ministers were contending for favor
[under the new king]. Since the new ruler was weak, he mobilized
the army to go north and attack Ch’i. Wu Tzu-hsü remonstrated:
“Kou-chien does not have two flavors in his food. He consoles the
[families of] the dead and inquires about the ill, for he wants to
employ them. If this man doesn’t die, he will inevitably cause
disaster for Wu. Today Wu’s having Yüeh is like a man having an
acute illness in his abdomen. But if your majesty does not make
Yüeh his priority but focuses upon Ch’i, won’t this truly be an
error?” The king of Wu did not listen, but instead attacked Ch’i,
greatly defeating Ch’i’s army at Ai-ling, going on to overawe the
rulers of Tsou and Lu and then return. He increasingly distanced
himself from Wu Tzu-hsü’s plans.
   Four years later, when the king of Wu was about to go north to
attack Ch’i, Kou-chien, king of Yüeh, employing Tzu-kung’s
strategy, led his masses to assist Wu while greatly augmenting the
treasures that he had presented to the Grand Steward P’i. Having
already received bribes from Yüeh on several occasions, Grand
Steward P’i’s love and trust for Yüeh became vastly greater, and
day and night he spoke on their behalf to the king of Wu. The king
of Wu trusted and employed P’i’s plans. Wu Tzu-hsü remonstrated:
“Now Yüeh is an abdominal illness. Today you trust their specious
phrases and false behavior while coveting Ch’i. If you destroy Ch’i
it will be like [having] a rocky field, of no utility. Moreover the
Announcement of P’an Keng said: “If there are those who
overturn, overstep, or are disrespectful [to my orders], then cut off
their noses, utterly exterminate them. Ensure that they will not
leave behind any posterity, do not allow their seed to be moved to
this city.”52 This is the way by which the Shang arose. I would like
your majesty to abandon Ch’i and give priority to Yüeh. If you
don’t, later you will experience immeasurable regret.” But the king
of Wu did not listen, and sent Wu Tzu-hsü to Ch’i. When Tzu-hsü
was about to depart [to return to Wu] he addressed his son: “I have
remonstrated with the king several times, but the king has not
employed [my plans]. I can now perceive that Wu is lost. For you
to perish together with Wu would be of no advantage.” Then he
entrusted his son to Pao Mu of Ch’i, and returned to report to Wu.
   Wu’s Grand Steward Po P’i had already had disagreements with
Tzu-hsü, so he slandered him: “Tzu-hsü’s character is hard and
brutal, of little charity, suspicious and malevolent. I fear his enmity
will cause great disaster. Previously your majesty wanted to attack
Ch’i, but Tzu-hsü felt it was not possible. In the end your majesty
attacked it with great success. Tzu-hsü was ashamed that his plans
and strategies were not employed, so he reacted with rancor toward
you. And now that you are again about to attack Ch’i, Tzu-hsü
alone opposes it and strongly remonstrates against it. He obstructs
and slanders those in authority, and would rejoice if Wu should be
defeated since his own plans would prevail. Now your majesty is
himself going forth, assembling the entire military force of the
state in order to attack Ch’i. Because Tzu-hsü’s remonstrances
have not been heeded, he declines to participate, and feigns illness
and inability to travel. Your majesty must be prepared—for this to
turn into a disaster would not be difficult.
  Moreover, I dispatched men to observe him secretly. When he
was an emissary to Ch’i he entrusted his son to the Pao clan of
Ch’i. Now he is a minister who within has failed to attain his
ambition, and without relies on the feudal lords; who personally
acted as the former king’s minister for planning but now is not
used. He is constantly discontented and resentful. I would like your
majesty to plan for it early on.”
  The king of Wu said: “Not only do you speak about it, I also
have doubted him.” Then he had an emissary present Wu Tzu-hsü
with the Shu-lü sword, saying: “You should use this to die.”
   Wu Tzu-hsü looked toward Heaven and sighed: “Alas! The
slanderous minister P’i causes chaos, but the king turns around and
executes me! I caused your father to become hegemon. When you
had not yet been established [as Heir Apparent] and the various
       princes were contending for the designation, I engaged in a death
       struggle on your behalf with the former king.53 You almost were
       not established. When you gained the throne, you wanted to divide
       the state of Wu with me, but I wouldn’t dare hope for it. Yet now
       you listen to the speeches of sycophants and thereby kill your
       elders.” Then he instructed his retainers: “You must plant my grave
       with catalpa trees in order that they may be used for vessels
       [coffins]. And gouge out my eyes and suspend them above Wu’s
       East gate so that I may see Yüeh’s invaders enter and destroy Wu.”
       Then he cut his throat and died. When the king of Wu heard about
       it he was enraged and seized Tzu-hsü’s corpse, stuffed it into a
       leather sack, and floated it out onto the Yangtze River. The people
       of Wu pitied him so they erected a shrine above the river.
       Thereafter it was called “Mount Hsü.”
          When the king of Wu had executed Wu Tzu-hsü he proceeded to
       attack Ch’i. The Pao clan of Ch’i assassinated their ruler Duke Tao
       and set up Yang Sheng. The king of Wu wanted to mount a
       punitive expedition against the brigands, but was not victorious
       and abandoned it. Two years later the king of Wu summoned the
       rulers of Lu and Wei to a meeting at T’aokao. The year after, he
       convened a great meeting of the feudal lords in the north at Yellow
       Pool, forcing the Chou to come. Kou-chien, king of Yüeh,
       suddenly attacked, killing Wu’s Heir Apparent and destroying his
       forces. When the king of Wu heard about it, he returned and had
       envoys arrange a truce with Yüeh with generous presents. Nine
       years thereafter, Kou-chien, king of Yüeh, went on to exterminate
       Wu, killing King Fu-ch’ai. He also executed the Grand Steward P’i
       because he had been disloyal to his ruler, accepted heavy bribes
       from external sources, and colluded with him.
       ***
         The Grand Historian comments:
       How extreme is the poison of vengeance among men!
  Wu Tzu-hsü’s dramatic biography immediately suggests certain
observations. First, the ease with which men shifted allegiances and were
willingly embraced by other factions or even states is astounding. A
general who suddenly lost favor, whether through battlefield defeat or
political machination, might flee to the enemy and—contrary to
expectation—not only avoid execution but actually be enfeoffed, his
troops and followers being equally welcomed. A political figure who
became entangled in court intrigues might also find hospitable refuge in
either friendly or enemy states, and be granted significant power as a
minister, advisor, or even a strategist for military campaigns against his
former state. Clearly, although loyalty was a much espoused virtue in Sun
Wu’s era—Confucius, identified throughout Chinese history with
promoting it, is even mentioned in Wu Tzu-hsü’s biography—it was
frequently slighted in favor of personal ambition.
   Second, the intensity and extensiveness of the court intrigues—even
allowing that exaggeration and romantic embellishment may have affected
the historical materials available to the Grand Historian four centuries later
—is startling. 54 Many officials fled or perished because greed and lust
propelled them into conflict with others, including the previously
mentioned duke of Shen.55 Although the ancient rulers portrayed in the
Tso chuan and Shih chi tend to have an archetypal cast, the contrast
between frugal, dedicated, and intensely committed young kings such as
Ho-lü and Kou-chien and their enemies—such as the licentious Ch’u kings
—remains striking. Worthy, conscientious rulers seem to have been a
minority despite the much-proclaimed watchwords that flourished from
the Chou’s victory onward: “nourish the people,” “provide for the people’s
welfare.”56 Obviously Mencius, more than a century later, had many
contemporary examples to rail against.
   Third, the role of spirit, or ch’i, much emphasized in the Art of War, can
be seen as a significant factor throughout ancient history from biographies
such as these. On the whole, states that were well governed by reasonably
compassionate, dynamic rulers enjoyed much greater support and even
enthusiastic commitment from both the populace and officials. Their
people went forth into battle ungrudgingly, with determination and
intensity, unified and disciplined in defense of their interests. In contrast,
under corrupt and extravagant rulers the people began military campaigns
already weary and exhausted, and could only grow more disspirited and
filled with rancour, even if initially motivated by “national antagonisms”
to fight the enemy. The habits and behavior of such rulers brought about,
of themselves, many of the objectives of T’ai Kung’s so-called “civil
offensive”—spreading dissension, demoralizing the populace, and
incapacitating the government.57 King Kou-chien’s bribing of Po P’i
provides an extreme example of the effects attainable through successfully
implementing such policies. By acting submissively, feigning loyalty, and
playing upon King Fu-ch’ai’s desires for victory and power over the
northern Chou states through Po P’i’s persuasions, Yüeh insidiously
deflected attention away from itself and ensured that Wu would dissipate
its military strength and energy.
   Sun-tzu is only mentioned twice in Wu Tzu-hsü’s biography: first as a
general in the campaign of 512 B.C. that took Shu, and later just prior to
launching the campaign that penetrated Ch’u’s interior to sieze its capital
of Ying and doubtlessly sowed the seeds for its own eventual demise. The
absence of any further mention thereafter lends support to the possibility
that, having witnessed King Ho-lü’s sudden transformation from a worthy,
self-controlled ruler to a man enamored of the pleasures found in the Ch’u
capital (where he lingered long after he should have simply annexed the
city and returned to Wu), Sun-tzu realized the moment had passed, and the
time to depart had arrived. Presumably he would have at least been
granted generous rewards if he had not already acquired his share of the
plunder.58 Therefore, if he didn’t disperse them among the people—
contrary to the fictionalized account—Sun-tzu could easily have survived
for many years in secret retirement, developing the sophisticated doctrines
expressed in the Art of War.


                    THE CONQUEST OF CH’U

   In the first year of King Ho-lü’s reign, after some years of preparation,
Wu moved its capital to Ku-su (approximately modern Su-chou). The new
city, constructed on the Chou model with inner and outer fortified walls,
provides clear evidence of the effectiveness of Wu’s bureaucratic
administration, as well as their material resources and planning
capabilities. The city was immense, with the inner wall’s perimeter
reportedly being thirty li, and the outer wall’s fifty li. Constructed at the
edge of T’ai Hu (Vast Lake), it was also sited along the first section of an
eventual network of extensive canals that were to prove of great
significance in Chinese history. Ostensibly developed to transport grain
and facilitate trade, this first canal section was of course primarily
strategic in importance, facilitating the movement of troops toward the
north.
   Commencing with Ho-lü’s third year, Wu launched a series of nearly
annual attacks against Ch’u, always emerging victorious. With each attack
it subjugated additional Ch’u client states, sometimes permanently
absorbing them, at other times merely freeing them from the yoke of Ch’u
dominance. At the same time Wu sought to ensure that any of the smaller,
powerful states that might mount a surprise attack on its homeland—
should it mobilize extensively to undertake a far-reaching campaign—had
their military potential negated through preemptive aggressive action. The
battles listed in Wu Tzu-hsü’s biography as commencing with Ho-lü’s
reign, while not complete, include the major ones. Of particular
importance was the victorious attack in 511 B.C. on Shu, a Ch’u state in
the region where the former Wu generals were emplaced. Because of the
two royal brothers’ detailed knowledge of Wu (and potential factional
support within it), they had constituted a formidable threat until thereby
eliminated. Wu also directed its first strike against Yüeh in 510 B.C.;
thereafter, apparently fearing Yüeh’s great military potential, King Ho-lü
had Wu’s already extensive fortifications expanded and strengthened in
order to encompass all the populace. 59 In 509 B.C. Ch’u finally decided
to attempt an attack against Wu only to be repelled and suffer the loss of
additional towns.
   Unmentioned in the biography but reported in other sources is that Wu,
under King Ho-lü, had deliberately adopted a temporizing strategy for this
period in order to enervate Ch’u and dissipate its resources. According to
the Tso chuan, this policy of temporizing and harassment was advanced by
Wu Tzu-hsü rather than Sun-tzu, although it initially may have been
formulated by Sun Wu for his mentor’s presentation. The record runs:
       The King of Wu inquired of Wu Yün: “When you first spoke about
       attacking Ch’u I knew it would be possible, but I feared [King
       Liao] would dispatch me. Moreover, I detested the fact that other
       men would therefore gain [the benefit of] my achievements. Now I
       will have it myself. What about an attack on Ch’u?”
          [Wu Tzu-hsü] replied: “In Ch’u those who hold the reins of
       government are numerous and at odds with each other. None of
       them is willing to undertake the responsibility for [resolving]
       Ch’u’s misfortunes. If we create three armies to harass them, when
       one of them arrives [at Ch’u’s border] all [their troops] will
       certainly come forth. When they come forth then [our army] should
       withdraw; when the enemy retires, we should then go forth. Ch’u
       will certainly be fatigued from [moving back and forth over] the
       roads. Do this several times to exhaust them; employ many
       methods to bring about misjudgment. If, after they are exhausted,
       we follow up with our three armies, we will certainly realize a
       major conquest.” Ho-lü followed his advice, and thenceforth Ch’u
       began to be debilitated.60
   Wu accordingly divided its forces into three field armies, each
dispatched to engage the enemy in turn, but always directed to never
become involved in protracted battles or decisive confrontations. Mobility
was emphasized in effecting a long-term campaign of harassment that not
only had physical objectives, but also focused on disrupting their
command, sowing doubt and dissension, and making Ch’u’s leadership
both feel and be incapable of coping with Wu’s threats.
   The strategy of mounting a marauding campaign was ostensibly chosen
to allow Wu’s forces time to rest and rebuild, as well as to undermine and
weaken the enemy. However, Ch’u’s overwhelming might and the largely
impenetrable nature of its state also dictated the need to avoid headlong
confrontations in which Wu would inevitably be outnumbered. Wu was
therefore forced to contemplate employing the confining characteristics of
the terrain and rivers to its tactical advantage, spreading the enemy out,
choosing its objectives carefully, and suddenly concentrating its forces
where unexpected—all principles found in Sun-tzu’s Art of War, which
itself emphasizes segmenting and combining, changing and transforming
as necessary:
          The army is established by deceit, moves for advantage, and
       changes through segmenting and reuniting. Thus its speed is like
       the wind, its sl.owness like the forest; its invasion and plundering
       like a fire; unmoving, it is like the mountains. It is as difficult to
       know as the darkness; in movement it is like thunder.61
   If Sun-Tzu’s biography is at all credible, it would seem reasonable, as
claimed by traditionalist scholars, that Sun-tzu was entrusted with overall
command of Wu’s military forces for the purpose of effecting their
reorganization and training. From the Art of War and other military
classics it is clear that even at this early date, approximately 509 B.C.,
small unit organization, segmentation, articulation, and maneuver were all
primary objectives of military preparation, furnishing the basis for
implementing complex battlefield tactics.
   Unlike in the north and in the “system of five” later advocated by Lord
Shang and most of the Seven Military Classics, Wu apparently organized
its military on a decade system.62 The squad consisted of eleven men,
comprised of ten men and an officer. A company, being ten squads,
numbered 110 men; a battalion (or regiment) 1,100 men and officers; and
an army 11,200 men—10 regiments plus an additional 100 command
personnel. These would all be combat troops, primarily infantry, and
would be supplemented by chariots for open terrain engagements against
states such as Ch’i. In contrast, the armies found in the north were
centered upon the chariot, with infantry forces supplementing them,
although the latter become the central tactical element as time progressed
and tactics evolved during the Spring and Autumn period. In the campaign
against Ch’u that eventually reached Ying, Wu’s three armies thus totalled
33,600 highly disciplined, well-organized combat soldiers capable of
following orders and executing tactics.63
   Space does not permit recounting or analyzing the battles prior to the
campaign of 506 B.C. against Ch’u, although in virtually all of them Wu
seized the initiative, manipulated Ch’u’s armies, and employed deceit and
unorthodox tactics extensively. Wu’s experience turned talented generals
into effective commanders, and unified the soldiers behind a king who
willingly shared every hardship with them.64 Conversely, Ch’u
increasingly antagonized the allied and subordinate states upon whom it
might draw; debilitated the people; and oriented itself toward self-
destruction.
   Ch’u’s monumental defeat at Ying was in part made possible because of
the greed of a single man, Nang Wa, who held virtual power as prime
minister in Ch’u over the youthful ruler. Foolishly yielding to his own
avarice, he imprisoned the rulers of Ts’ai and T’ang, two northern client
states (whose domains had been incorporated within Ch’u territory) when
they individually refused to yield gifts he desired.65 After being
imprisoned for three years they were finally released in 506 B.C.,
ostensibly as the result of diplomatic pressure exerted by Chin and the
other states in the northern alliance.66 While en route back to his native
place the marquis of Ts’ai, ruler of a state long known for its military
prowess and unyielding spirit, attacked the minor but ancient state of
Shen, slaying its ruler for abandoning him during his imprisonment.67
Naturally this stimulated Ch’u into undertaking reprisals, and they
prepared to send forth a punitive military force.
   Ts’ai, although protected by walls that Ch’u had in fact erected earlier,
realized it would certainly be vanquished, possibly even exterminated, and
therefore appealed to Wu for assistance. As the result of one man’s foolish
acts Wu thus acquired an ally deep within Ch’u territory, far along one of
the few possible invasion routes. This ensured that they would have local
guides and additional military forces, and that they could be reprovisioned
well onto enemy terrain. Consequently, Wu’s fixed number of vessels
could be employed to transport more troops or a small number of chariots
up the Huai river. Furthermore, Ts’ai’s forces not only increased the
overall number of troops challenging Ch’u, but also immediately
constrained Ch’u’s tactical possibilities, forcing them to consign a
significant army to a fixed location.
   Because Ch’u was well protected by mountains and dense forests, its
leaders no doubt felt reasonably secure. Any land approach would have to
negotiate one of three narrow passes, none of which were characterized by
wide roads or improved routes of passage. While the Ch’u capital of Ying
was theoretically accessible by boat to any force undertaking the arduous
task of working up the Yangtze river, the disadvantages of such a choice
were obvious: the great expenditure of energy en route would make the
sailors too weary to supplement the infantry forces. A limited marine
infantry force would therefore have to effect a landing and then launch an
assault against a fortified city manned by a vastly superior number of
entrenched enemy troops. However, the density of the forests and
narrowness of the roads also guaranteed that they would be relatively
undefended and an army moving through them would in fact be following
Sun-tzu’s dictums: “To travel a thousand li without becoming fatigued,
traverse unoccupied terrain. . . . To effect an unhampered advance, strike
their vacuities.”68
   The campaign itself, reconstructed from the Tso chuan, can be outlined
as follows,69 Wu, perhaps with Sun Wu in command and Wu Tzu-hsü and
Po P’i assisting, divided its troops into two operational field units. The
larger force, which could proceed by land, was dispatched to invade Ch’u
from the south, while a smaller force worked up the Huai river to the north
and had as its initial objective breaking the siege around Ts’ai in order to
attain all the advantages enumerated above. Both forces chose largely
unpopulated and undefended areas through which to advance, thereby
minimizing the difficulties—apart from natural obstacles of terrain—they
would encounter.
   Ch’u’s intelligence was apparently faulty, for it learned only of Wu’s
northern invasion force, and reacted by abandoning the siege at Ts’ai to
confront the enemy at a forward position. Nang Wa, bellicosely exercising
general command despite his previous defeat at Wu’s hands, divided his
armies: A holding force was deployed in a defensive posture to await Wu’s
infantry forces, which were moving inland after having disembarked from
their boats at the Huai river. A second, smaller force was deputed to
destroy their vessels and thereby prevent an escape once the frontal attack
managed to rout them, as well as to launch a crushing ambush from Wu’s
rear. The main strength, under Nang Wa’s personal command, was to
advance and strike the trapped invaders after crossing the Han river and
moving up.
   While his plan was admirably conceived and potentially effective, it
was rendered useless by the threatening incursion of Wu’s southern
armies. Once Nang Wa learned of this additional thrust he was persuaded
to disregard the northern advance (which was then continuing along three
routes, Wu having effectively segmented its forces to traverse the narrow
terrain successfully), cross the Han River, and attack the southern
invaders. According to the Tso chuan, Nang Wa feared losing the fame and
glory of victory to another general, and therefore determined to engage the
enemy himself.70 Unfortunately, his move proved precipitous, and Wu’s
forces, having penetrated deeply into enemy territory, were united and
determined, just as Sun-tzu observes in the Art of War:
          In general the Tao of an invader is that when one has penetrated
       deeply [into enemy territory] the army will be unified, and the
       defenders will not be able to conquer you. . . . When the soldiers
       and officers have penetrated deeply they will not be afraid. Where
       there is nowhere to go they will be solid. When they have
       advanced deeply they will cling together. When there is no
       alternative they will fight. . . . If there is no escape from death, the
       officers and soldiers will fully exhaust their strength.71
  Nang Wa’s hasty advance achieved the confrontation he so urgently
desired, but Ch’u’s army was defeated in three successive battles, forcing
him ever backward into the interior. Suddenly displaying the cowardice of
the belligerent, he wanted to flee for his life, but was dissuaded when
upbraided for his cowardice. Therefore he timorously withdrew to reform
his forces on the west bank of the Han river, directly opposite Wu’s army,
which soon deployed on the east bank.
   Events then proceeded as summarized in Wu Tzu-hsü’s biography: Fu-
kai, a decisive commander accompanied by spirited troops, seized the
moment to attack a perceived weakness in the enemy, and emerged
victorious. Initially he had counseled King Ho-lü to allow him to launch
the first attack:
          Nang Wa of Ch’u is not benevolent, while none of his ministers
       have the will to fight to the death. If I first launch a fierce attack
       against him, his troops will certainly run off. And if you then
       sustain the attack with the main army, we will certainly conquer
       them.72
  When permission was denied he boldly proceeded on his own,
reportedly exclaiming: “What is referred to as a subject acting righteously
without awaiting [his ruler’s] edicts is just this! If I die today Ch’u can be
invaded.”73 The Art of War, addressing commanders on the necessity for
acting independently of the ruler’s constraints once empowered (as
exemplified by Sun-tzu’s own actions in his biography), states:
       If the Tao of Warfare [indicates] certain victory, even though the
       ruler has instructed that combat should be avoided, if you must
       engage in battle it is permissible. If the Tao of Warfare [indicates]
       you will not be victorious, even though the ruler instructs you to
       engage in battle, not fighting is permissible.74
Sun-tzu also said, “One whose general is capable and not interfered with
by the ruler will be victorious.”75 (However, it should be remembered that
Ho-lü was still acting as his own field commander, just as kings in the
Early Chou and beginning of the Spring and Autumn period normally
had.)
  The attack proved successful, routing Nang Wa’s troops in what came to
be known as the battle of Po-chü. Fu-kai then led his aroused warriors on a
well-disciplined pursuit of the vanquished Ch’u army, engaging them
again at the Ch’ing-fa River. After repelling a counterattack by a second,
newly arrived Ch’u army, Wu’s forces pressed on until reaching the
capital. The remaining portion of the invasion, apparently requiring five
distinct battles, must have constituted essentially a running engagement
from the decisive clash at Po-chü until the fall of Ying. Furthermore, the
overall campaign has been characterized as the first lengthy encounter of
the Spring and Autumn period, and a harbinger of developments in the
Warring States period.76 Surprisingly, once King Ho-lü entered Ying,
discipline among the high command immediately broke down, and they
tangled over the splendors and spoils of Ch’u’s vast wealth. This
unfortunately provided an opportunity for Yüeh and Ch’in to profit
aggressively, as will be discussed below.
   Fu-kai, who shortly thereafter was defeated by the Ch’in army
dispatched as a result of Shen Pao-hsü’s entreaties and then made his way
back to Wu to usurp the throne in Ho-lü’s absence, was otherwise a
brilliant and decisive commander. His tactics in pursuing and engaging
Ch’u’s army at the Ch’ing-fa River also provide evidence of the general
currency of several concepts found in the Art of War, especially the
importance of maneuver in order to manipulate and exploit the enemy’s
ch’i (morale). This excerpt from the Tso-chuan proves illuminating,
although the accuracy of his words is open to suspicion:
       Wu followed Ch’u’s [army] up to the Ch’ing-fa River and was
       about to strike it. King77 Fu-kai said: “Since a distressed animal
       will still fight, how much the more so will men! If they know they
       will not be spared and commit themselves to die, they will
       certainly defeat us. We should cause those who ford the river first
       to think that they have escaped; those behind them will long to join
       them, and no one will have the heart to do battle. When half have
       forded the river they can be attacked.” They followed his plan and
       again defeated them.
          [Ch’u’s soldiers] were preparing food when the men of Wu
       reached them. They ate [Ch’u’s] food and then followed them,
       defeating the various forces at Yung-shih River. In five
       engagements they reached Ying.78
   According to the Art of War, “If there is no place to go it is fatal
terrain.”79 Common military wisdom advised against deploying an army
between the enemy and a river because it could easily become deadly or
fatal ground. Furthermore, it was generally recognized that pursuing a
retreating foe was a dangerous undertaking, fraught with possibilities of
deception and ambush. Sun-tzu noted:
       Do not pursue feigned retreats. Do not attack animated troops. Do
       not swallow an army acting as bait. Do not obstruct an army
       retreating homeward. If you besiege an army you must leave an
       outlet. Do not press an exhausted invader.80
Similarly, he discussed some of the problems related to maneuvering an
army near rivers:
       After crossing rivers you must distance yourself from them. If the
       enemy is fording a river to advance, do not confront them in the
       water. When half their forces have crossed, it will be advantageous
       to strike them.
          If you want to engage the enemy in battle, do not array your
       forces near the river to confront the invader, but look for tenable
       ground and occupy the heights. Do not confront the current’s flow.
       This is the Way to deploy the army where there are rivers.81
While Ch’u’s retreat was so hasty and disordered that there was no
possibility of it being a ruse to draw them forth into an ambush, exactly
this was almost accomplished when Wu’s forces paused and a second,
fresh Ch’u army suddenly struck. However, Nang Wa clearly had not acted
in accord with Sun-tzu’s principles, for he deployed his troops on the side
of the Han River to confront an invading enemy. Fu-kai, on the other hand,
allowed the enemy an opening to encourage their hope that they would
escape. He thus deflated their will to fight, avoided “casting them onto
fatal terrain,” and ensured his next strike would evoke fright and terror.
Again the Art of War, speaking about the necessity for manipulating the
ch’i of one’s own troops, advises:
          Cast them into hopeless situations and they will be preserved;
       have them penetrate fatal terrain and they will live. Only after the
       masses have penetrated dangerous terrain will they be able to craft
       victory out of defeat.82
   Fu-kai’s own troops, having penetrated deeply into enemy territory, had
already been thrust into this exact situation, whereas his controlled
advance defused any possibility of the enemy suddenly experiencing a
surge of determination from finding themselves on fatal terrain. Thus he
was able to realize Sun-tzu’s principle for striking the enemy when their
ch’i had abated:
         The ch’i of the Three Armies can be snatched away, the
       commanding general’s mind can be seized. For this reason in the
       morning their ch’i is ardent; during the day their ch’i becomes
       indolent; at dusk their ch’i is exhausted. Thus one who excels at
       employing the army avoids their ardent ch’i, and strikes when it is
       indolent or exhausted. This is the way to manipulate ch’i.83
  (Sun-tzu’s discussion of ch’i varying with specific times of the day is of
course merely an observationally based analogy cited for illustrative
purposes rather than a time-based tactic.)
   Through his restraint at Ch’ing-fa, Fu-kai opportunely managed to feed
his own army and thereby realize two more of Sun-tzu’s dictums:
          The wise general will concentrate upon securing provisions from
       the enemy. One bushel of the enemy’s foodstuffs is worth twenty
       of ours; one picul of fodder is worth twenty of ours.84

          With the sated await the hungry.85
   Surprisingly, after victoriously occupying Ying, Wu then suffered two
quick defeats, Fu-kai himself exercising command in one of them before
returning to Wu to usurp the throne. The five hundred chariots dispatched
by Ch’in as a rescue force were in themselves formidable, especially on
Ch’u’s more favorable terrain. Despite the problematic aspects of chariot
employment, when supplemented by thirty-six thousand infantrymen, they
probably proved decisive in successfully engaging an infantry force only
minimally supported by chariots.
   Wu’s campaign strategy had been designed for long-term
implementation rather than achieving an immediate, suicidal, direct
confrontation. The state, which to some degree lagged behind Ch’u both
materially and culturally, employed its fewer numbers more effectively,
stressed mobility, and deliberately selected advantageous sites for its
battles. In addition, Wu benefited extensively from the willing support of
indigenous peoples and enjoyed the strong allegiance of its own populace.
The value of the former in supplying information and guidance, as well as
material support, should not be underestimated. As Sun-tzu advised:
       One who doesn’t know the plans of the feudal lords can not forge
       preparatory alliances. One who doesn’t know the topography of
       mountains and forests, ravines and defiles, wetlands and marshes,
       can not maneuver the army. One who does not employ local guides
       will not secure advantages of terrain. One who does not know
       these four or five cannot [command] the army of a hegemon or true
       king.86
Furthermore, Wu not only nurtured its own people but also embraced
foreign advisors, whereas Ch’u debilitated its people and repeatedly drove
away talented and capable officials, frequently into Wu. Wu therefore
succeeded first in blunting Ch’u’s incursions and then in totally defeating
it, achieving an objective hitherto unattainable by the northern states.


            THE WAR BETWEEN WU AND YÜEH

   Wu’s precipitous rise to power preceded its even swifter collapse, self-
destruction, and eventual decimation at the hands of Yüeh. The record of
their conflict has been famous throughout Chinese history, giving rise to
many stories and paradigms current even today. Since Yüeh is mentioned
in the Art of War, the succeeding decades are relevant to any study of Sun-
tzu’s thought and era. However, whether Sun Wu personally lingered to
participate in the government of King Ho-lü’s son and successor, Fu-ch’ai,
is doubtful, particularly as the latter was headstrong, extravagant, and
licentious, vividly in contrast with his father. The overall developments,
however, merit a few paragraphs of summary and analysis because they
provide evidence of the strategic concepts and practices of the time, and
may have either derived from Sun-tzu’s own studies or influenced their
formulation.87
   In 496 B.C., nearly a decade after the conquest of Ch’u, the king of
Yüeh died and was succeeded by his talented son Kou-chien. King Ho-lü,
having already been attacked by Yüeh while tarrying in Ying and thus ever
conscious of their military potential, was determined to take advantage of
the opportunity provided by Yüeh’s internal discord and national
mourning to effect a strike. However, contrary to expectation, Wu was in
fact defeated by the youthful king, and Ho-lü, as noted in Wu Tzu-hsü’s
biography, died from the fatal infection that developed from a foot wound
sustained in battle. Thereafter his son, Fu-ch’ai, who immediately
dedicated himself to avenging Ho-lü’s death, embarked upon an extensive
two-year program of military preparation. Although the task of retraining
and drilling the entire army should naturally have fallen to Sun Wu, his
name is not mentioned in the records at this time.
   King Kou-chien was cast in the mold of the late Ho-lü— frugal,
solicitous of the people’s welfare, courageous, and aggressive—and he
was aided by two advisors from Ch’u, the military strategist Fan Li and
the administrator Wen Chung. (Both had an opportunity to flee to Wu but
preferred not to aid an enemy of their native state, whatever their own
personal difficulties in Ch’u.) With Ch’u’s collapse, Wu and Yüeh soon
found themselves colliding over military supremacy and hegemony, even
though no one yet regarded Yüeh as a serious contender.
   In 494 B.C., after reorganizing, training, and drilling the troops for two
years, King Fu-ch’ai felt prepared to attack Yüeh. King Kou-chien, having
acquired intelligence about the impending campaign, decided to mount a
preemptive naval strike despite Fan Li’s opposition, only to suffer a total
defeat and be forced to flee for refuge accompanied by five thousand
picked troops. As Wu Tzu-hsü’s biography indicates, Fu-ch’ai was
dissuaded from capitalizing upon the hard-won opportunity to exterminate
Yüeh’s ruling house and annex its territory, instead acceding to their
specious entreaties (accompanied of course by generous bribes and
profferings of fealty and submission) to be permitted to survive.88 An
anguished Wu Tzu-hsü, observing the king’s character and behavior,
accurately prophesized that Yüeh would be revived and go on to
extinguish Wu in two decades. As the Art of War asserts, “If someone is
victorious in battle and succeeds in attack, but does not exploit the
achievement, it is disastrous and his fate should be termed ‘wasteful and
tarrying.’”89
   In the years prior to Yüeh’s sudden attack on Wu, King Kou-chien
skillfully played the role of a submissive vassal, first dwelling in Wu’s
capital for three years (coincidentally providing him with an excellent
opportunity to study the state and acquire vital military intelligence), and
thereafter in Yüeh (from where he made semiannual pilgrimages to Wu).
In sum, Kou-chien fervently embarked upon a campaign devoted to
fostering strength and prosperity while conducting a “civil offensive”
against Fu-ch’ai.90 Whenever possible he increased Fu-ch’ai’s arrogance,
played upon his desires, and encouraged him in his deluded campaigns
against Ch’i in the north.91
   In 482 B.C. the dramatic moment finally arrived. King Fuch’ai coerced
several states (including an enervated Chin) into convening a meeting at
Yellow Springs in the north, traveling up the new canal with his elite
forces and the bulk of his army. This vain and wasteful display of power
was mounted for the sole purpose of overawing the recalcitrant states into
acknowledging Wu’s preeminent position among the alliance and
according him the status of hegemon. Consequently the interior of Wu was
devoid of stalwart troops; only the old and incapacitated remained to man
the fortifications against potential invaders.
   Yüeh sent forth an army of approximately 49,000 men, including 6,000
elite royal troops, and through a combination of timing and the
implementation of unorthodox tactics, including feigned withdrawals,
managed to destroy much of Wu’s navy, strike its capital, and wrest
several easy victories.92 However, when Wu’s main force raced back to
engage them and Fu-ch’ai requested a truce, Fan Li advised granting it to
avoid a potentially dangerous confrontation with superior forces.
   In 478 B.C. Wu suffered from a famine, possibly brought about by
Yüeh having supplied them with nongerminating rice that Fu-ch’ai may
have foolishly ordered distributed to the people as an improved stock.
Kou-chien, while basically acting on Fan Li’s new estimation that Wu’s
situation could be exploited, also relied upon Fu-ch’ai’s willingness to
fight. Yüeh first employed certain subordinate states to initiate the
conflict, then moved forward itself. Wu, with sixty thousand troops,
clearly outnumbered them and possessed the advantage of holding a
fortified position on the east bank of the river. Yüeh therefore resorted to
creating the unexpected by developing a plan that would stir confusion in
Wu’s entrenched, well-organized forces, manipulating them to advantage
by compelling them into movement. As Sun-tzu observed, “One who
excels at warfare compels men and is not compelled by others.”93
   As indicated in the simplified accompanying diagram, Yüeh split its
troops into four forces, and secretly dispatched one each north and south
about two li along the river bank. The main army, with strength equal or
greater to the detached units, remained arrayed directly opposite Wu’s
encampment. Then, in the middle of the night, Yüeh had its two flank
forces cross the river, deliberately raising a clamor rather than stressing
silence and stealth. This startled Fu-ch’ai’s command into assuming they
were coming under a sudden, two-pronged flanking attack designed to
envelop them; therefore they hastily sped their troops to the northern and
southern perimeters to counter both of them.
   Once Wu’s forces had been coerced into precipitous movement, Yüeh’s
main army, spearheaded by six thousand elite royal warriors, silently
crossed the river, reformed, and then suddenly drummed the attack with a
horrendous din. Panic-stricken, the Wu forces already en route to defend
the flanks chaotically turned about to contend with a frontal attack, only to
be subjected to the flanking assault they had just turned away from. As the
Art of War remarks, “When someone excels in attacking, the enemy does
not know where to mount his defense.”94 More concretely:
       The location where we will engage the enemy must not become
       known to them. If it is not known, then positions that they must
       prepare to defend will be numerous. If the positions the enemy
       prepares to defend are numerous, then the forces we will engage
       will be few. Thus if they prepare to defend the front, to the rear
       there will be few men. If they defend the rear, in the front there
       will be few. If they prepare to defend the left flank, then on the
       right there will be few men. If they prepare to defend the right
       flank, then on the left there will be few men. If there isn’t any
       position left undefended, then there won’t be any place with more
       than a few. The few [are the ones] who prepare against others; the
       many [are the ones] who make others prepare against them.95
   By manipulating Wu’s defensive forces Kou-chien managed to change
his “few” into an effective “many,” just as the Art of War advocates.
Yüeh’s forces then easily dominated the battlefield; Wu’s survivors fled
twenty li back into the interior, where they reformed only to suffer another
attack and be vanquished. Finally Fu-ch’ai, with ten thousand troops,
managed to retreat into the stronghold of Wu’s capital, where he was then
besieged by Kou-chien’s army. Thereafter Yüeh assumed full control of all
the state’s territory and population except for Fu-ch’ai’s single enclave.
Battle of Li-che River. initial deployments.




Second Phase:
“Noisy” nigth crossing by Yüeh’s detached forces stimulates Wu’s
response.
  Over the next five years Yüeh besieged and attacked Fuch’ai in his
remaining bastion until finally capturing him in 473 B.C., whereupon he
opted to commit suicide rather than subsist on a meager fief merely to
perpetuate Wu’s ancestral sacrifices.96 With his death the saga concluded
and Wu ceased to exist.
   In their fatal conflict Yüeh managed to emerge victorious because it
utilized every means available to mount a campaign to survive and
conquer. Wen Chung plied Fu-ch’ai with treasures and enticements while
blinding him through his greedy advisors. Kou-chien nurtured the people;
Fan Li structured the army and developed their strategy and tactics.
Conversely, Fuch’ai focused upon realizing his quest for power; exploited
and exhausted the people, both in military activities and in his pursuit of
personal pleasure; and was distracted from the real threat by hopes of
conquering Ch’i, a vast and powerful northern state. The critical battle at
Li-che River was a masterly exercise in unorthodox tactics, clearly
exemplifying the principles found in the Art of War: “Attack when they
are unprepared, go forth where they will not expect it.”97




Battle of Li-che River, Third Phase:
Yüeh’score forces silently cross and strike the center—Wu collapses its
flank response
Battle of Li-che River, Final Phaser
Finger attack plus center thrust drives Wu back in chaos. Second attack
leads to defeat and fleeing to city.


                  Main Concepts in the Art of War

Sun-tzu’s Art of War, as transmitted through the ages, consists of thirteen
chapters of varying length, each ostensibly focused upon a specific topic.
While most contemporary Chinese military scholars continue to
characterize the entire work as an organic whole, marked by the logical
progression and development of themes from start to finish, obvious
relationships between supposedly connected passages are frequently
difficult to determine or are simply nonexistent. However, the major
concepts generally receive frequent, consistent treatment throughout,
largely supporting the attribution of the book to a single figure or well-
integrated school of thought.98
   The military writings recently unearthed from a Han Dynasty tomb
include a partial copy of the Art of War in essentially its traditional form,
together with significant additional material, such as the “King of Wu’s
Questions.”99 However, the translation that follows has been based upon
the heavily annotated classical version because it reflects the
understanding and views of the past thousand years, the beliefs upon
which government and military officials based their actions in real history.
The traditional text has been revised only where the tomb materials
resolve otherwise opaque passages or supplement obvious deficiencies,
although the impact of such changes on the overall content remains
minimal. Significant variations in characters and sentences will also be
discussed in notes supplementing the translation.
   Because the Art of War is remarkably lucid, if compressed and
sometimes enigmatic, only a brief introduction to the major concepts,
principles, and tactics need be undertaken here. No attempt will be made
to exhaustively analyze and systematize all of them, nor will those already
discussed in conjunction with Wu’s military campaigns be repeated. Each
paragraph in the text is self-contained, and should be contemplated in
isolation as well as in the context of the chapter. Given the character of the
text, we will also forego extensively quoting passages to justify the
analysis, although a few critical ones will be introduced to elucidate
certain complex concepts, and the latter will also be expanded in the notes.
Selected works from the vast secondary literature, including those in
Chinese and Japanese, will also be cited in the notes when the authors
offer unusual perspectives on the text, advance new interpretations, or
provide insightful commentary on problematic sentences.


                      GENERAL PRINCIPLES

   As discussed in the general introduction, by Sun-tzu’s era the practice
and scope of warfare had evolved sufficiently to endanger the existence of
virtually every state, large and small alike. Many had already perished;
innumerable ruling families had been extinguished and their peoples
subjugated; and others tenuously survived only through adroit political
maneuvering and servile submission. Amid the turmoil of the late Spring
and Autumn period Sun-tzu felt that mobilizing the nation for war,
committing the army to battle, and risking the state’s destruction could
only be undertaken with the greatest gravity. 100 The very opening words
of the Art of War stress the critical importance of warfare: “Warfare is the
greatest affair of state, the basis of life and death, the Way to survival or
extinction. It must be thoroughly pondered and analyzed.”101
   Throughout the book Sun-tzu’s approach to employing the army is
thoroughly analytical, mandating careful planning and the formulation of
an overall strategy before commencing a campaign. The focus of all grand
strategy must be the development of a prosperous, contented populace
whose willing allegiance to their ruler is unquestioned. 102 Thereafter
diplomatic initiatives can be effected, but military preparations should
never be neglected. The primary objective should be to subjugate other
states without actually engaging in armed combat, thereby realizing the
ideal of complete victory:
       The highest realization of warfare is to attack the enemy’s plans;
       next is to attack their alliances; next to attack their army; and the
       lowest is to attack their fortified cities.103 Thus one who excels at
       employing the military subjugates other people’s armies without
       engaging in battle, captures other people’s fortified cities without
       attacking them, and destroys other people’s states without
       prolonged fighting. He must fight under Heaven with the
       paramount aim of “preservation.” Thus his weapons will not
       become dull, and the gains can be preserved. This is the strategy
       for planning offensives. 104
   Whenever possible “victory” should be achieved through diplomatic
coercion, thwarting the enemy’s plans and alliances, and frustrating his
strategy. Only if an enemy threatens the state with military action or
refuses to acquiesce without being brutally forced into submission should
the government resort to armed combat. Even when exercising this option,
every military campaign should focus upon achieving maximum results
with minimum risk and exposure, limiting as far as possible the
destruction to be inflicted and suffered, fighting with the aim of
preservation. 105 Therefore Sun-tzu said:
       Preserving the enemy’s state capital is best, destroying their state
       capital second-best. Preserving their army is best, destroying their
       army second-best. Preserving their battalions is best, destroying
       their battalions second-best. Preserving their companies is best,
       destroying their companies second-best. Preserving their squads is
       best, destroying their squads second-best. For this reason attaining
       one hundred victories in one hundred battles is not the pinnacle of
       excellence. Subjugating the enemy’s army without fighting is the
       true pinnacle of excellence.106
   In the extant Art of War Sun-tzu repeatedly emphasizes the need for
rationality and self-control, and stresses the vital necessity to avoid all
engagements not based upon extensive, detailed analyses of the situation,
the combat options, and one’s own capabilities. Detailed calculations were
apparently performed in the ancestral temple prior to mobilizing for a
campaign, and presumably similar, more specific assessments would be
made by the commander before engaging an enemy force in the field.107
Although undertaken in the ancestral temple, they were not a form of
divination (as in previous ages)108, but were probably based upon
quantified estimates that systematically assigned numerical values to the
strength of objectively examined aspects for both sides.109 In chapter one,
“Initial Estimations,” he states:
  Thus when making a comparative evaluation through estimations,
seeking out its true nature, ask:
       Which ruler has the Tao?
       Which general has greater ability?
       Who has gained [the advantages of] Heaven and Earth?
       Whose laws and orders are more thoroughly implemented?
       Whose forces are stronger?
       Whose officers and troops are better trained?110
       Whose rewards and punishments are clearer?111
       From these I will know victory and defeat.112
Furthermore, in chapter four, “Military Disposition,” Sun-tzu describes the
quantified basis for calculating the force levels necessary to achieve
victory:
          Terrain gives birth to measurement; measurement produces the
       estimation [of forces]. Estimation [of forces] gives rise to
       calculating [the numbers of men]. Calculating [the numbers of
       men] gives rise to weighing [strength]. Weighing [strength] gives
       birth to victory.
   Sun-tzu’s criteria for tactically analyzing the enemy and battlefield
situations may be seen as consisting of some forty paired, mutually
defined, interrelated categories that can be abstracted from the text. (This
may reflect Taoist thinking about names and their mutual, interrelated
definitions, as sometimes claimed, or simply be the product of his own
analytical reflection.)113 Among these are Heaven—Earth;114 offense—
defense; advance—retreat; and unorthodox—orthodox. The comparative
state of readiness can be decided by reflecting upon such pairs as hunger
—satiety; exhausted—rested; ordered—disordered; fearful—confident;
cold—warm; wet—dry; and lax—alert. Whenever such calculations
indicate the enemy holds a decided advantage, the general must either
avoid him, assume a defensive posture, or conceive and implement tactics
that will convert the enemy’s superiority into weakness, such as harassing
the rested until they become exhausted, as Wu did to Ch’u.
   Unlike the incident retold earlier in which the king of Ch’u committed
troops over a few mulberry trees, or policies advanced by the Legalists in
which military measures are simply another instrument for increasing the
wealth and prosperity of the state, Sun-tzu stressed that warfare should not
be undertaken unless the state is threatened. Haste, fear of being labeled a
coward, and personal emotions such as anger and hatred should never be
permitted to adversely influence state and command decision making.115
The army must not be rashly thrown into an engagement, thrust into a war,
or unnecessarily mobilized:
          If it is not advantageous, do not move. If objectives can not be
       attained, do not employ the army. Unless endangered do not
       engage in warfare. The ruler cannot mobilize the army out of
       personal anger. The general can not engage in battle because of
       personal frustration. When it is advantageous, move; when not
       advantageous, stop. Anger can revert to happiness, annoyance can
       revert to joy, but a vanquished state cannot be revived, the dead
       cannot be brought back to life.116
  Instead, restraint should be exercised while implementing measures to
ensure that the army can not be defeated:
         In antiquity those that excelled in warfare first made themselves
       unconquerable in order to await [the moment when] the enemy
       could be conquered. Being unconquerable lies with yourself; being
       conquerable lies with the enemy.
         Thus one who excels in warfare is able to make himself
       unconquerable, but cannot necessarily cause the enemy to be
       conquerable. Thus it is said a strategy for conquering the enemy
       can be known but yet not possible to implement.117
In Sun-tzu’s view employing defensive measures is equally aggressive,
ensuring that the army’s strength will be sufficient to prevail in situations
where other techniques, including deception, can not be effectively
implemented. His views are summarized in chapter four, “Military
Disposition”:
          One who cannot be victorious assumes a defensive posture; one
       who can be victorious attacks. In these circumstances by assuming
       a defensive posture, strength will be more than adequate, whereas
       in offensive actions it would be inadequate.
         Those who excel at defense bury themselves away below the
       lowest depths of Earth. Those who excel at offense move from
       above the greatest heights of Heaven. Thus they are able to
       preserve themselves and attain complete victory.
   Sun-tzu concludes: “The victorious army first realizes the conditions for
victory, and then seeks to engage in battle. The vanquished army fights
first, and then seeks victory.”118 Obviously this dictum was directed
against those generals who, having assumed the mantle of command,
rushed headlong into battle irrespective of the consequences, who fought
whenever confronted by an enemy force and thereby endangered not only
their own troops, but also the state.119


          THE COMMANDER’S QUALIFICATIONS

   Since the ruler and commander-in-chief control the state’s destiny, Sun-
tzu discussed their qualifications, variously identifying critical abilities
and characteristics, assets and liabilities. Coupled with his assertions
regarding the necessary independence of the commander once in the field,
they are viewed as providing clear evidence of the rise and presence of the
professional general, although such qualities would equally be necessary
for any ruler, whether administering the state or serving as his own field
commander.120
  Many of the military and philosophical writings propose ideal
combinations of traits, universally giving priority either to courage or
wisdom. In the traditional edition of the Art of War121 the first list appears
in “Initial Estimations”: wisdom, credibility, benevolence, courage, and
strictness. Commentators generally emphasize the placement of “wisdom”
before courage, although the book does not otherwise discuss any reason
for its priority.122 However, focusing upon wisdom fully accords with the
importance bestowed in the book upon calculations, knowledge, and
tactical expertise. Conversely, there is no expanded commentary on the
role of courage beyond condemning generals committed to dying (because
their vainglorious manifestation of courage would bring about the army’s
destruction).
   Abstracting the requisite traits and abilities, and correlating them with
the weaknesses specifically mentioned in The Art of War, yields the
following comprehensive portrait:


  STRENGTHS                       WEAKNESSES

  wisdom                          unenlightened

  knowledge

  credibility                     brutalizes and fears the masses

  strictness                      not strict

  benevolent                      loves the people123

  courage                         committed to life

  skillful analyst                unable to fathom the enemy

  unconcerned by fame             obsessed with achieving fame for purity

  unconcerned by punishment

  places army first

  tranquil                        easily angered
  obscure                        hasty to act

  upright                        arrogant

  self-disciplined               weak

  strong commander               poor commander

  clever/inventive

  all-encompassing talents


   It naturally follows that the absence of a desirable quality or the
presence of its opposite must be considered a serious flaw. Astute generals
will deliberately seek out and exploit such flaws in an enemy commander,
just as the state of Wu did when attacking the vain, greedy, and impulsive
Nang Wa. Later military texts such as the Six Secret Teachings discuss
numerous character deficiencies and exploitable traits, including virtues
that have become extreme and therefore unbalanced, in both commanders
and rulers, and suggest concrete ways to probe for them and turn them to
advantage.124


                     STRATEGY AND TACTICS

   Sun-tzu’s basic strategy focuses upon manipulating the enemy, creating
the opportunity for an easy victory, and then applying maximum power at
the appropriate moment. To this end he classifies the types of terrain and
their exploitation; advances numerous tactics for probing, manipulating,
and weakening the enemy; advocates the employment of both orthodox
(cheng) and unorthodox (ch’i) troops to wrest the victory; and stresses
speed and surprise. The enemy is lured into untenable positions with
prospects of gain; enervated by being wearied and exhausted before the
attack; and penetrated by forces that are suddenly concentrated at
vulnerable points. The army should always be active, even when assuming
a defensive posture, to create and seize the temporary tactical imbalance of
power (ch’üan) that will ensure victory.125 Accordingly, certain situations
and configurations of terrain should be avoided, being instead turned to
advantage when opportune. Thereafter, the focus can be directed toward
realizing the predetermined campaign strategy and implementing
appropriate operational and battlefield tactics to defeat the enemy.
Avoiding a strong force is not cowardice, but wisdom, for it is self-
defeating to fight when and where not advantageous. 126 As Sun-tzu said,
“One who knows when he can fight, and when he cannot fight, will be
victorious.”127
   The fundamental tactical principle for attacks is “Go forth where they
do not expect it, attack where they are not prepared.” This principle can
only be realized through secrecy in all activities; by complete self-control
and strict discipline within the army; and by being unfathomable. The
corollary to being unfathomable is seeking out and gaining detailed
knowledge of the enemy through all available means, including the
rigorous employment of spies. The unvarying rule is never to rely upon the
good will of others, nor upon fortuitous circumstances, but guarantee—
through knowledge, persistent analysis, and defensive preparation—that
the enemy can neither mount a surprise attack nor gain a victory through
simple coercion. As Sun-tzu said:
         One who knows the enemy and knows himself will not be
       endangered in a hundred engagements. One who does not know the
       enemy but knows himself will sometimes be victorious, sometimes
       meet with defeat. One who knows neither the enemy nor himself
       will invariably be defeated in every engagement. 128
  Apart from strongly advocating the use of spies to acquire essential
military intelligence,129 Sun - tzu also emphasized the high price of
partial knowledge:
           If I know our troops can attack, but do not know the enemy
       cannot be attacked, it is only halfway to victory. If I know the
       enemy can be attacked, but do not realize our troops cannot attack,
       it is only halfway to victory.
         Knowing that the enemy can be attacked, and knowing that our
       army can effect the attack, but not knowing the terrain is not
       suitable for combat,130 is only halfway to victory. Thus one who
       truly knows the army will never be deluded when he moves, never
       be impoverished when initiating an action.
         Thus it is said if you know them and know yourself, your victory
       will not be imperiled. If you know Heaven and you know Earth,
       your victory can be complete.131


              DECEPTION AND THE FORMLESS

   Sun-tzu’s military thought has frequently been erroneously identified
solely with “deceit and deception” because he advocated employing them
to attain military objectives. For this he was often scorned by the literati,
but was of course closely followed by later military writers, including
most of the Seven Military Classics.132 Although an insightful reading of
the Art of War will reveal that many of his proposed measures rely on
deception for their foundation and implementation, only two explicit
statements actually appear in the book. The most famous one is found in
chapter one, “Initial Estimations”:
          Warfare is the Way (Tao) of deception. Thus although [you are]
       capable, display incapability to them. When committed to
       employing your forces, feign inactivity. When [your objective] is
       nearby, make it appear as if distant; when far away, create the
       illusion of being nearby.
   The second one, from chapter seven, “Military Combat,” asserts: “Thus
the army is established by deceit, moves for advantage, and changes
through segmenting and reuniting.”
   Deceit is of course not practiced as an art or end in itself, contrary to
tendencies sometimes prevailing in the modern world. Rather, false
measures, feints, prevarications, troop deployments, dragging brush,
feigning chaos, and other such acts are all designed to further the single
objective of deceiving the enemy so that he will be confused or forced to
respond in a predetermined way and thereby provide the army with an
exploitable advantage.133 Warfare must be viewed as a matter of
deception, of constantly creating false appearances, spreading
disinformation, and employing trickery and deceit. When imaginatively
created and effectively implemented, the enemy will neither know where
to attack nor what formations to employ, and will accordingly be
condemned to making fatal errors.
  Apart from measures undertaken within the military itself, “expendable
spies” (who “spread disinformation outside the state”) should also be
employed. Therefore Sun-Tzu advised, “provide our [expendable spies]
with [false information] and have them leak it to enemy agents.”134
Naturally their lifespan is limited, for when the ruse is uncovered the
expendable spy is normally terminated by the enemy, explaining why they
were also termed “dead (or doomed) spies.”
   Deception, however skillfully practiced, will invariably prove
ineffective unless the army can maintain its own plans in secrecy.
Although the later military writings more explicitly address the need for
secrecy,135 Sun-tzu stressed that the commanding general should be
obscure and unfathomable, never revealing his plans or intentions even to
his own troops:
       It is essential for a general to be tranquil and obscure, upright and
       self-disciplined, and able to stupify the eyes and ears of the officers
       and troops, keeping them ignorant. He alters his management of
       affairs and changes his strategies to keep other people from
       recognizing them. He shifts his position and traverses indirect
       routes to keep other people from being able to anticipate him.136
Further on in the chapter Sun-tzu adds: “Direct the masses of the Three
Armies as though commanding one man. Press affairs on them, do not
explain the purpose to them.”137
   Deception and manipulation are actually aspects of the greater question
of form (hsing) and the formless. Whenever the army deploys onto the
battlefield, its configuration, being immediately apparent, will evoke a
reaction in the enemy. Whether the enemy will then modify his original
anticipations, vary his tactics, or view the events as confirming a
preconceived battle plan depends upon his evaluation of the unfolding
situation. In normal circumstances the disposition of the forces quickly
betrays the average commander’s intentions and methods. Although
warfare in this period was not as rigid nor as predictable as in the Early
Chou or ancient Western world because segmentation, small unit
articulation, and independent movement had all been thoroughly
developed by Sun-tzu’s time, in general an attack’s thrust could still be
predicted from the method of de ployment.
   No doubt realizing that any action will elicit a response and that
remaining invisible is impossible, Sun-tzu advanced a theory of what
might best be summarized as the “deceptive and formless.” While unstated
in the Art of War, obviously the best way to be unfathomable—that is, to
be formless—is to display false appearances to the enemy. By integrating
these two principles, a foe can be manipulated and vital secrecy preserved.
Many commentators over the centuries failed to realize that the formless is
attained through creative deceit and therefore erroneously and artificially
isolated the two.
  About manifesting forms (hsing) to manipulate the enemy Sun-tzu said:
          One who excels at moving the enemy deploys in a configuration
       (hsing) to which the enemy must respond. He offers something that
       the enemy must seize. With profit he moves them, with the
       foundation he awaits them.138
   In chapter six, “Vacuity and Substance” (which contains an extensive
discussion on form [hsing]), Sun-tzu elucidates two basic principles for
effectively waging warfare: attack voids in the enemy and employ
substantial force at chosen points. These essential methods have already
been witnessed in Wu’s attacks on Ch’u, and the important paragraphs
from the first half of Sun-tzu’s chapter previously cited need not be
repeated. However, the conclusion—be formless yourself—bears noting:
          If I determine the enemy’s disposition of forces (hsing) while I
       have no perceptible form, I can concentrate [my forces] while the
       enemy is fragmented. If we are concentrated into a single force
       while he is fragmented into ten, then we can attack him with ten
       times his strength. Thus we are many and the enemy is few. If we
       can attack his few with our many, those whom we engage in battle
       will be severely constrained.
To fragment an enemy the army must not betray its intentions; secrecy
must be maintained. Operating in ignorance, the enemy must inevitably
disperse his forces to prepare against thrusts from every direction. As Sun-
tzu explains:
         The location where we will engage the enemy must not become
       known to them. If it is not known, then the positions that they must
       prepare to defend will be numerous. If the positions the enemy
       prepares to defend are numerous, then the forces we engage will be
       few.139
   In the last paragraphs of the chapter Sun-tzu characterizes the
interrelationship of the disposition of force (hsing) between the two sides.
Certain important principles are buried within these paragraphs: variation
is the essence of response; only the commander knows the true
configuration behind the visible disposition of force. Sun-tzu observed:
          In accord with the enemy’s disposition (hsing) we impose
       measures on the masses that produce victory, but the masses are
       unable to fathom them. Men all know the disposition (hsing) by
       which we attain victory, but no one knows the configuration
       (hsing) through which we control the victory. Thus a victorious
       battle [strategy] is not repeated, the configurations (hsing) of
       response [to the enemy] are inexhaustible.
   In the very last paragraph the relationship between shih, strategic power,
and hsing, form or disposition of force, is glimpsed. Commentators have
sometimes mistakenly understood the concept and nature of this response,
believing that once the enemy moves and commits himself, action must
then be automatically taken in some fixed or predetermined way.
However, Sun-tzu’s entire chapter shows that the forms of response, while
based upon the enemy’s actual disposition and certain unchangeable
principles and combat realities, should be freely chosen within essential
parameters. As an illustration, an attack on a fixed emplacement might
proceed in several ways, depending upon where the enemy is weakest and
where he might be anticipating an attack. Flanking forces might be
concentrated upon the left or the right; one flank or the other might feign
retreat to draw the enemy out, or might concentrate for a deep penetration
in order to turn about and attack the rear. Thus while Sun-tzu employs the
image of water, the analogy should not be pushed to the extent that there is
only one possible flow for a given terrain. Flexibility, as distinguished
from the traditional practice of fixed deployment in the Early Chou and
seen in the West until recent times, is being stressed. It is decidedly not
some form of determinism that is being advocated. Thus he states:
          Now the army’s disposition of force (hsing) is like water.
       Water’s configuration (hsing) avoids heights and races downward.
       The army’s disposition of force (hsing) avoids the substantial and
       strikes the vacuous. Water configures (hsing) its flow in accord
       with the terrain; the army controls its victory in accord with the
       enemy. Thus the army does not maintain any constant strategic
       configuration of power (hsing); water has no constant shape
       (hsing). One who is able to change and transform in accord with
       the enemy and wrest victory is termed spiritual!


               CONFIGURATIONS OF TERRAIN

   The recognition that topography is fundamental to military tactics, the
classification of terrain types, and the association of basic tactical
principles with particular terrains are all generally attributed to Sun-tzu.
Even though a cursory examination of the Tso chuan will quickly indicate
that effective commanders had long been implementing terrain-based
tactics, and certain land configurations, such as sinkholes, were commonly
known to be fatal to any disposition of forces, Sun-tzu was perhaps the
first to study these questions systematically and develop a coherent body
of operational principles. The Art of War obviously influenced many of the
later military writings, particularly the Six Secret Teachings, which
contains several chapters advancing appropriate tactics for a wide variety
of situations.140
   In his very first chapter Sun-tzu includes terrain (Earth) among the five
major factors in warfare: “Therefore structure warfare according to [the
following] five factors, evaluate it comparatively though estimations, and
seek out its true nature. The first is termed the Tao, the second Heaven, the
third Earth, the fourth generals, and the fifth laws [for military
organization and discipline].” He goes on to provide a limited definition of
“Earth”: “Earth encompasses far or near, difficult or easy, expansive or
confined, fatal or tenable terrain.” Therefore, one criteria for evaluating
the probable victor in any encounter is “Who has gained [the advantages
of] Heaven and Earth?”
   Everything depends upon terrain because, as previously cited, “terrain
gives birth to measurement,” leading in turn to determining the forces
required and their configuration. As already noted in the discussion of
Wu’s strategy for attacking Ch’u, military intelligence consists not only of
knowledge of the enemy, but also the topography of the invasion route and
likely battlegrounds.141 Consequently, Sun-tzu said:
          Configuration of terrain is an aid to the army. Analyzing the
       enemy, taking control of victory, estimating ravines and defiles, the
       distant and near, is the Tao of the superior general. One who knows
       these and employs them in combat will certainly be victorious. One
       who does not know these nor employ them in combat will certainly
       be defeated.142
   “Nine terrains” are frequently associated with Sun-tzu because that is
the title of his famous chapter eleven where the nine appear: dispersive,
light, contentious, traversable, focal, heavy, entrapping, encircled, and
fatal. However, careful study of the Art of War reveals more than twenty
distinct configurations of terrain, as well as several specific, deadly land
formations such as “Heaven’s Well.” They are discussed in chapters eight,
entitled “Nine Changes”; ten, “Configurations of Terrain”; and eleven,
“Nine Terrains.”143 While the terms overlap to some extent, the
definitions and associated tactics are never contradictory. Furthermore, the
texts remain remarkably clear and explicit even in our era, precluding any
need to enumerate or further analyze the various configurations.144
   Apart from the named configurations Sun-tzu also mentions such
problematic obstacles as rivers, wetlands, mountains, marshes, and salt
flats. For example, in chapter nine, “Maneuvering the Army,” where he
correlates four deployments with land features, it states:
       When you cross salt marshes and wetlands, concentrate on quickly
       getting away from them; do not remain. If you engage in battle in
       marshes or wetlands, you must stay in areas with marsh grass and
       keep groves of trees at your back. This is the way to deploy the
       army in marshes and wetlands.145
Although such features are discussed separately, in many cases they may
be subsumed under one of the categorical definitions. Those just listed
above all fall under “entrapping terrain”: “Where there are mountains and
forests, ravines and defiles, wetlands and marshes, wherever the road is
difficult to negotiate, it is ‘entrapping terrain.’”146


                     SPIRIT AND COMMAND
  Sun-tzu frequently discusses the essential problem of command: forging
a clearly defined organization in control of thoroughly disciplined, well-
ordered troops.147 The critical element is spirit, technically known as ch’i,
the essential vital energy of life.148 The concept of ch’i is both integral
and fundamental to many aspects of Chinese thought, ranging from
metaphysics to medicine, science through religion. One popular view
believes that the character originally represented the vapors rising from
cooking rice, and is thus symbolic of nourishment in every sense.149 Ch’i
is the foundation and basis of courage, the vital spirit that is directed by
will and intention. When the men are well-trained, rested, properly fed,
clothed, and equipped, if their spirits are roused they will fight vigorously.
However, if physical or material conditions have blunted their spirit; if
there is any imbalance in the relationship between command and
troops;150 or if for any reason they have lost their motivation, they will be
defeated.
   Conversely, the commanding general must manipulate the situation so
as to avoid the enemy when their spirits are strong, such as early in the
day, and exploit any opportunity presented by their diminishment,
attacking when they no longer have any inclination to fight, such as when
about to return to camp. Prolonged warfare can only lead to enervation;
therefore, careful planning to guarantee the swift execution of campaign
strategy is paramount.151 Certain situations—such as being thrust onto
fatal terrain where a desperate battle must be fought—are conducive to
eliciting the army’s greatest efforts.152 Others are debilitating, dangerous,
even fatal, and must be scrupulously avoided.153 Rewards and
punishments provide the basis for control, but every effort must be made
to foster and maintain the proper attitude of desire and commitment.
Accordingly, all detrimental stimuli, such as omens and rumors, must be
prohibited. 154


    SHIH: STRATEGIC CONFIGURATION OF POWER

  The concept of shih (strategic power) figures prominently in both
ancient military and Legalist thought, perhaps originating with the former.
Although many contemporary monographs on the Legalist thinkers
attribute its origin to the philosopher Shen Tao155 and then trace its
appropriation and integration through Han Fei-tzu’s systematized thought,
studies of shih in the military works are just beginning to emerge.156
Unfortunately, it is a strategic concept whose complexities require a book-
length study to resolve a number of fundamental questions, including its
definition and character in individual works such as the Art of War, where
it is used in several, apparently distinct, ways; the evolution of the concept
in the military works, and especially the Seven Military Classics; whether
it and other, related concepts are as technically distinct as frequently
assumed, or the earlier stages reflect a rather generalized
interchangeability of terms and concepts (such as hsing, form, and shih,
power); and its interrelationship with developments in Legalist thought,
and whether the later Military Classics, such as the Three Strategies,
reflect new dimensions or orientations imposed upon essentially tactical
military vocabulary under the influence of newly formulated Legalist
views.
   A complicating factor is posed by the cryptic nature of many of the
texts. Statements and even complete sections are generally brief and often
enigmatic, apparently representing only notes or cursive summaries of
extensive, complex, systematized thought, most of which has either been
lost or was never cohesively formulated in writing.157 Moreover, the
assumption that concepts are used in a consistent and precise way in these
early books, while necessary for analytical studies, is not invariably valid,
and also needs to be sustained.
   The scope of these issues precludes incorporating an intensive
examination of the nature and function of shih in a book directed to
presenting a translation of the Art of War. However, a brief
characterization of the dimensions of the concept, a short review of
previous studies, and an assessment of various translation possibilities
remain unavoidable. While we must defer any systematic justification of
the terms chosen to translate shih and its related concepts, some indication
of our reasoning is of course warranted. Most of this discussion will be
found compressed into the notes; additional comments briefly explicating
the concept within concrete contexts, selectively drawing upon the
extensive classical commentaries, will also be found appended to the
translations.
   A wide variety of terms have been used to translate the term and
approximate the concept from the earliest part of the twentieth century
until the present. Among those found in the more reliable translations of
the Art of War and philosophical works that employ shih in their
discussions are circumstances, energy, latent energy, combined energy,
shape, strength, momentum, tactical power, force, authority, influence,
power, condition of power, force of circumstances, positional advantage,
and purchase.158
   From the foregoing, coupled with a comparative analysis of the term in
the Art of War, numerous military writings, and pre-Ch’in philosophical
works, it may be concluded that the concept of shih entails the idea of
advantage resulting from superior position. However, this aspect of
positional advantage has perhaps been overemphasized, thereby slighting
the essential role the element of mass (the army’s forces) fulfills in
creating impact. The paradigm example is Sun-tsu’s analogy of a log or
stone perched atop a hill that, although temporarily stabilized, retains great
potential energy. In motion, that energy can be released, and need only be
directed to be explosively effective:
       One who employs strategic power commands men in battle as if he
       were rolling logs and stones. The nature of wood and stone is to be
       quiet when stable but to move when on precipitous ground. If they
       are square they stop, if round they tend to move. Thus the strategic
       power of one who excels at employing men in warfare is
       comparable to rolling round boulders down a thousand-fathom
       mountain. Such is the strategic configuration of power [shih].159
   Consequently, Sun-tzu sought to maneuver the army into a position
where it enjoyed such great tactical advantage that the impact of its attack,
the impulse of its “strategic configuration of power” (shih), would be like
the sudden onrush of water cascading from mountain peaks. Deploying the
troops into a suitable configuration (hsing); creating a favorable
“imbalance of power” (ch’üan); concentrating forces upon focused targets;
exploiting advantages of terrain; and stimulating the men’s spirits would
all be directed toward this moment, toward this decisive objective.
   According to the concepts of modern physics, the momentum that can
be developed, and thus the amount of force that can be applied when a
rolling stone collides with an object in its path, depends upon the original
height; the final speed at the moment of impact (which will have been
reduced from the theoretical maximum as it passes over objects and
encounters resistance); and its weight. Clearly a stone will transfer less
energy at the moment of impact than a much larger boulder, and the total
destructive potential is inherently related to the mass of the object.
   Thus it appears that two equally important factors are integrated by this
concept, and they should therefore be expressed by any translation. First,
the strategic advantage conveyed by superior position, and second, the
power of the forces involved. (“Power” refers to army’s overall capability
in all aspects—including endurance, spirit, discipline, equipment,
command, and physical condition—rather than strength of numbers
alone.) Obviously, as the great commentator Chiang Pai-li noted, strategic
advantage has a pronounced temporal character; therefore, it should not be
confined to exploiting the advantages of terrain as usually thought.
   Strategic advantage is of course in essence a comparative term, not an
absolute one, although a vast force will possess great power. (In the
extreme case the advantages of terrain perhaps become negligible. A
minimal force, such as a platoon or company, will represent one extreme, a
vast army the other.) Accordingly, we have chosen to translate the term
shih by “strategic configuration of power,” and will use the term
throughout except where a different sense, such as shape or circumstances,
seems to have been intended. Although “strategic power” is basically an
acceptable abridgement, and perhaps adequate in itself, “configuration”
will generally be added as a reminder that the power results from
configuring the military’s armed might in accord with, and to the
exploitation of, the terrain in order to gain a strategic advantage. However,
when the term is conjoined with others, such as “military” or “army,” or
the text would read awkwardly, “strategic power” will be employed by
itself, with “configuration” understood.
   Insofar as two military forces may be described comparatively, there are
of course some difficulties, and the question might well be posed, does
shih exist in the absence of an enemy? Is it inappropriate to refer to the
shih of an army if the two forces are equally matched, poised across a
valley, with both of them, in their static positions, enjoying equal
positional advantage relative to a potential battlefield between them and
each other? Since Sun-tzu refers to shih chün, “strategic power that is
equal,” it would seem that the term refers to a general evaluation versus
terrain, and thus configuration of power, rather than specifically confined
to being defined relative to an enemy’s position and deployment. (Ch’üan,
imbalance of power, refers to this relative imbalance of forces.) To
facilitate such inquiry and identify occurrences of the term for those who
wish to contemplate such issues, “shih” will generally be added
parenthetically whenever the term is translated.
   It should also be noted that shih and hsing (form), central concepts in
the Art of War, are also found in an important verse of the Tao Te Ching,
which may be translated as follows: “The Tao gives them birth, Te [Virtue]
nurtures them, things give them form (hsing), power (shih) completes
them.”160


        THE UNORTHODOX AND THE ORTHODOX

   The military concepts and applications of the unorthodox (ch’i) and
orthodox (cheng) probably originate with Sun-tzu, although the Art of War
does not discuss them extensively.161 Note that the text always orders
them as ch’i/cheng, unorthodox /orthodox, rather than as prioritized in the
West, orthodox /unorthodox. The implications, if any, remain to be
explored, although against a background of correctness and uprightness,
the choice seems deliberate. The military was generally regarded as ch’i
(unorthodox), in accord with Lao-tzu’s dictum: “With the orthodox govern
the state; with the unorthodox employ the army.”162 The later military
classics, such as the Wei Liao-tzu, Six Secret Teachings, and especially
Questions and Replies, devote considerable energy to discussing ch’i and
cheng and their employment.163
   While the subject of unorthodox and orthodox tactics clearly requires an
article or book in itself, in essence “orthodox” tactics include employing
troops in the normal, conventional, “by the book” expected ways, such as
massive frontal assaults, while stressing order and deliberate movement.
“Unorthodox” tactics are primarily realized through employing forces,
especially flexible ones, in imaginative, unconventional, unexpected ways.
Therefore, instead of direct chariot attacks, unorthodox tactics would
mount circular or flanking thrusts. Instead of frontal assaults, they would
follow indirect routes to stage unexpected, behind-the-lines forays. Their
definition is of course dependent upon normal expectation within a
particular battlefield context, as well as the enemy’s actual anticipations,
and therefore they are mutually defining, mutually transforming, and
circular in essence.
   The extant Art of War contains one succinct, critical passage, while the
concept’s application is visible in the principles and tactics proposed
throughout the book:
          In general, in battle one engages with the orthodox and gains
       victory through the unorthodox. Thus one who excels at sending
       forth the unorthodox is as inexhaustible as Heaven, as unlimited as
       the Yangtze and Yellow rivers. What reach an end and begin again
       are the sun and moon. What die and are reborn are the four
       seasons.
          The notes do not exceed five, but the changes of the five notes
       can never be fully heard. The colors do not exceed five, but the
       changes of the five colors can never be completely seen. The
       flavors do not exceed five, but the changes of the five flavors can
       never be completely tasted.
          In warfare the strategic configurations of power do not exceed
       the unorthodox and orthodox, but the changes of the unorthodox
       and orthodox can never be completely exhausted. The unorthodox
       and orthodox mutually produce each other, just like an endless
       cycle. Who can exhaust them?164
   Thus, as explicitly discussed by other military writings, the orthodox
may be used in unorthodox ways, while an orthodox attack may be
unorthodox when unexpected precisely because it is orthodox; a flanking
or indirect assault would thereby be considered normal and therefore
orthodox. A frontal feint by a large force, designed to distract or lure an
enemy, would also be unorthodox. The concept lends itself to extreme
complexities of thought, and has often been misunderstood throughout
Chinese history, or even dismissed as simplistic, when it is quite the
opposite. However, in essence it remains a descriptive tool for tactical
conceptualization, for characterizing and manipulating forces within—and
by exploiting—an enemy’s matrix of expectations, rather than a
transformational mode to be actualized in the concrete reality of men and
weapons the way a military formation is deployed. There is nothing
mysterious or mystical about ch’i and cheng and their mutually productive
relationship, yet later commentators and strategists sometimes become
seriously confused. Under such circumstances, a useful tactical
conceptualization becomes an unnecessary obstacle to clear strategic
thinking.
   The concept’s origins remain unclear, although speculation tends to
identify it with the conflation of thought that crystallized as Taoism, or as
deriving from divinatory practices. The interrelationship of ch’i and cheng
mirrors that of yin and yang, and at least one writer attributes the concept’s
roots to the yin-yang principles found in the I Ching. The orthodox is
identified with the firm or hard, while the unorthodox correlates with the
soft or yielding.165 The observation that reversal characterizes the natural
world figures prominently in the Tao Te Ching traditionally ascribed to the
reclusive Lao-tzu. Cheng turns into ch’i, things revert to their opposites (in
complementary, dynamic tension) after reaching their pinnacle, just as yin
and yang do.166
   A better feeling for the range of the terms may be gained by a brief
review of scholarly opinion over recent decades. For example, in the
introduction to his translation, General Griffith—a highly experienced
military officer with expert knowledge of strategy and tactics—states that
cheng forces engage, or engage and fix the enemy, while ch’i forces defeat
him, often through flanking and rear attacks.167 He also characterizes
cheng forces as the normal or direct, ch’i forces as extraordinary or
indirect; similarly, as fixing and flanking (or encircling), or again as the
“the force(s) of distraction and the force(s) of decision.”168 He goes on to
stress that ch’i operations are always strange, unexpected, and unorthodox,
and notes the reciprocal relationship between ch’i and cheng. Finally,
Griffith adds that the realization of ch’i and cheng is not confined to
tactical levels, but may also be implemented on strategic ones.169
  The eminent scholar and translator D. C. Lau, in a critical review of
Griffith’s translation, emphasizes the abstract nature of these two terms, as
opposed to invariably identifying them with forces, and suggests that they
might best be translated as “straightforward” and “crafty.”170
  Benjamin Wallacker, in a brief, often-cited etymological article,
concludes that cheng refers to military operations that pin down or “spike”
an enemy, while ch’i operations are maneuvers that force the enemy off
balance, bringing about his defeat. He further speculates that Sun-tzu’s
“formulations” seem likely to have been derived from experience with
cavalry forces. However, this would require revising the date of
composition to roughly the dawn of the third century B.C., or pushing
back the introduction of cavalry.171
   In an incisive book (The Art of Rulership) Roger T. Ames conceptually
translates the terms as “irregular deployments” and “regular
deployments.”172 However, “irregular” is perhaps an unfortunate choice,
being inherently burdened with adverse military connotations. Extreme
order and control are of course necessary to employ forces in ch’i
maneuvers; therefore Christopher Rand’s choice of “extraordinary” and
“normal” would seem to represent a better pair.173
   The Chinese secondary literature on Sun-tzu is overwhelming; however,
for ch’i/cheng most analysts essentially repeat the definitions found in the
Art of War and later military writings, emphasizing the realization of these
abstract concepts in concrete forces. Flexibility, maneuverability, and
swiftness are especially stressed when discussing ch’i forces, although
they should equally characterize all military units in Sun-tzu’s view.174


                     Sun Wu and the Art of War

There are three intertwined questions underlying the problem of dating the
Art of War: Did Sun Wu ever exist? When was the book composed? Was
Sun Wu in any way the author, progenitor, or inspiration for the extant
work? While these issues have been quietly debated for nearly a thousand
years, recent decades have witnessed a new level of intensity as
proponents argue fervently for one position or another, frequently on
ideological or nationalistic grounds. While a definitive answer is probably
unattainable, certain general conclusions can be drawn from the texts and
recently recovered tomb materials. Detailed consideration of all the
aspects, articles, and evidence would require an extensive monograph;
however, some of the larger issues are sufficiently interesting to merit
introduction and are therefore summarized below and in the notes.


                    SUN WU: MAN OR MYTH?

  As already noted, skeptics basically question Sun-tzu’s existence
because his name is never even mentioned in the Tso chuan, the primary
record of significant events in the Spring and Autumn period. Doubt was
first voiced in the Sung dynasty and gained adherents among Confucian-
oriented literati with the passage of centuries.175 However, the absence of
his name does not necessarily justify the conclusion that he didn’t exist;
rather, at most it might indicate he never played a significant role, but still
could have been a commander or strategist, and was simply eclipsed by
more dramatic figures such as Wu Tzu-hsü. A number of important and
generally acknowledged Spring and Autumn period figures do not appear
in the Tso chuan, but their existence has not been questioned. Therefore
traditionalist scholars decry these apparently ently singular attempts to
discredit the proposed progenitor of Chinese military strategy.
   The veracity and extent of Sun-tzu’s historical achievements have
become a burning issue because Sun-tzu’s adherents clearly want to
identify a famous figure with the Art of War, rather than an obscure recluse
—however brilliant and perceptive—without visible military experience.
The same impulse no doubt underlies assertions that Confucius served as
minister in Lu, historical records to the contrary. Taoist and Legalist
philosophers need not have participated in reality, but military thinkers,
who need credibility, should have, particularly as contemporary strategists
such as Fan Li distinguished themselves in Yüeh and other states.
   While the Tso chuan may be silent, the Shih chi and Wu Yüeh ch’un-
ch’iu both contain versions of the famous training episode with King Ho-
lü, as well as several other references and a few additional sentences Sun-
tzu may have uttered. In the Shih chi these appear in Sun-tzu’s own
biography; the biography of Wu Tzu-hsü; and the annals of the state of
Wu. In the chronicles of King Ho-lü in the Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu he is also
recorded as participating in two important campaigns, and all these
materials are consistent apart from minor additions or omissions.
However, the chronicles for the states of Ch’u and Yüeh in the Shih chi,
even though specifically identifying Wu Tzu-hsü and Po P’i as Wu
commanders, do not mention his name, nor do the chronicles of Yüeh in
the Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu.
   Contrary to the absence of Sun-tzu’s name in the above noted Ch’u and
Yüeh annals, the chronicles of King Ho-lü in the Wu Yüeh ch’un-chiu
preserve a discussion among Ch’u’s ministers that indicates the discontent
festering after the state had suffered another defeat at the hands of Wu.
They attributed all their problems to the pernicious effects of Fei Wu-chi’s
machinations, for his behavior had caused the loss of Wu Tzu-hsü and Po
P’i to Wu, as well as other talented ministers (such as Fan Li and Wen
Chung) to other states. Accordingly, Nang Wa and King Chao mounted an
attack against Fei Wu-chi, killing him and exterminating the clan.176
Although Sun-tzu was never associated with Ch’u, he is identified by the
ministers as one of Wu’s three troublesome generals.177
   Sun Wu’s name next occurs in Ho-lü’s sixth year when the king orders
him and Wu Tzu-hsü to mount the counterattack against Ch’u that results
in Wu’s victory at Yü-chang. Thereafter, Sun-tzu and Wu Tzu-hsü provide
joint advice regarding the feasibility of an invasion penetrating as far as
the capital of Ying. The record differs somewhat from the one cited
earlier:
          In the ninth year the king of Wu addressed Tzu-hsü and Sun Wu:
       “In the beginning you said that Ying could not be invaded. Now,
       finally, what about it?”
          The two generals replied: “Now warfare that borrows victory in
       order to complete its awesomeness is not the constant Tao of
       victory.”
         The king of Wu asked: “What do you mean?”
          The two generals replied: “The army that Ch’u has formed
       constitutes the strongest enemy under Heaven. Now if we engage
       their elite vanguard in battle, ten will be lost for every man left
       alive, and whether your majesty enters Ying will depend on
       Heaven. We do not dare say it will be certain.”
         The king of Wu said: “If I want to again suddenly strike Ch’u,
       what should we do to be successful?”
          Wu Tzu-hsü and Sun Wu said: “Nang Wa is greedy and has
       offended the feudal lords many times, while T’ang and Ts’ai hate
       him. If you must attack, get T’ang and Ts’ai.”178
Thereafter the dialogue continues with the generals recounting the story of
how Nang Wa detained the two rulers when they failed to satisfy his
desires, as previously noted.
   Following the conquest of Ying the chronicles describe Wu Tzu-hsü’s
efforts to avenge his father’s death, ending with the following sentences:
“Then he ordered Ho-lü to take King Chao’s wife as his concubine. Wu
Tzu-hsü, Sun Wu, and Po P’i also took as concubines the concubines of
Nang Wa and Ssu-ma Ch’eng in order to disgrace Ch’u’s ruler and
ministers.”179 While it is unlikely that Wu Tzu-hsü “ordered” the king to
take such action, the sentence suggests that Sun Wu played a major role
and implies that he would also have received substantial rewards from the
campaign.
   In the tenth year the great victory just at the end of the previous year
was somewhat mitigated when Wu’s armies suffered the two defeats
previously described, including a loss resulting from Ch’u’s resolute
incendiary attack.180 The text runs:
         Tzu-hsü and the others spoke among themselves: “Even though
       Ch’u has defeated our secondary force, they still haven’t injured
       us.”
          Sun Wu said: “With Wu’s shields and halberds I destroyed Ch’u
       in the west and expelled King Chao. [You] excavated the tomb of
       King P’ing of Ch’u, cutting and desecrating his corpse. It is already
       sufficient.”
         Wu Tzu-hsü said: “Since the beginnings of the hegemonic
       kings181 there has never been a subject who exacted revenge such
       as this. Let us depart.”182
The final line of King Ho-lü’s chronicles (following his death and the
ascension of Fu-ch’ai) largely repeats the evaluation found in Sun-tzu’s
Shih chi biography, but distributes the credit more widely: “At this time
Wu, employing the plans of Wu Tzu-hsü, Sun Wu, and Po P’i, destroyed
the strong state of Ch’u in the west, overawed Ch’i and Chin in the north,
and attacked Yüeh in the south.”183 Po P’i, whose traitorous behavior is
graphically portrayed in the chronicles of Fuch’ai, thus enjoys remarkably
positive treatment.
   The only pre-Ch’in books containing any references at all to Sun Wu
are Hsün-tzu and Han Fei-tzu. In the former the Lord of Lin-wu,
emphasizing the importance of tactical methods over concerns about the
people and their welfare, states: “What the military esteems is seizing
advantage; what it practices is change and deception. One who excels at
employing the military responds precipitously, distantly, and darkly. No
one knows from where he goes forth. When Sun and Wu employed them,
they had no enemies under Heaven.”184 In the latter a sentence appears
that is also found incorporated in the Shih chi: “Within the borders
everyone speaks about military affairs. Every family has the books of Sun
and Wu stored away, but the army grows weaker. Those who speak about
warfare are numerous, but those who bear armor are few.”185 Because
both of these statements couple “Sun” with “Wu,” some scholars claim
that Sun Pin and Wu Ch’i are the intended references, not Sun Wu and Wu
Ch’i.186
   The passages recounted above and earlier comprise all the presently
known early materials upon Sun-tzu apart from the tomb fragments to be
discussed below. Traditionalist scholars who accept the authenticity and
accuracy of the Shih chi and Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu find little basis for
doubting Sun Wu’s existence and role, particularly as many Shih chi
accounts that had been discredited in previous centuries have been largely
corroborated by recent archaeological discoveries. However, even though
Ssu-ma Ch’ien, the author of the entire work, obviously exercised great
diligence in composing his accounts, even frequently including
contradictory versions when unable to resolve them, questions remain
about what records and materials may have existed in the Former Han
after the ravages of wars and centuries, and how reliable they might have
remained. Apart from Ssu-ma Ch’ien’s own motives and the conceptual
matrix he inherently employed to understand and organize events and
interpret personalities, over four centuries his primary sources may have
undergone editing and drastic revision.187 Moreover, although the Wu
Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu is nominally attributed to Chao Yeh, a scholar of the
Later Han dynasty active in the second half of the first century A.D., its
authenticity has recently been questioned, and it has even been viewed as a
romanticized, Yüan dynasty redaction of events from this period.188
Therefore, even if such doubts are discounted, its accounts can not be used
to confirm the veracity of Ssu-ma Ch’ien’s source materials, for they may
well have been based upon the Shih chi itself.
   Recently unearthed tomb texts, while initially welcomed as resolving
the question of Sun-tzu’s existence and the actuality of his interview with
King Ho-lü, have only kindled further controversy because each camp
interprets their significance in accord with their own viewpoints. However,
a set of fragments claimed as comprising the source version for the Shih
chi account dates at least several decades earlier than Ssu-ma Ch’ien’s
work.189 While very badly fragmented, it clearly refers to Sun-tzu and
King Ho-lü discussing Sun-tzu’s work in thirteen chapters, and also seems
to contain a similar account of the training incident. Whether this adds
further credence to Ssu-ma Ch’ien’s account is uncertain, for an immense
gap of three centuries still remains.
  However, any possible substantiation of the well-known training
episode is particularly important because many doubts have been raised
about the propriety, or even possibility, of the ruler allowing his palace
women to be employed in such a fashion—as well as whether Sun-tzu
could have possibly claimed such power of life and death in a mere
exercise.190 Certainly it was a dramatic gesture, but also one virtually
certain to cost him his life. The objection that such a serious matter would
have been better tested with a contingent of palace guards can not be
easily dismissed.191 At the same time Sun-tzu represented the new,
talented rising class,192 and Ho-lü had dramatically usurped the throne by
having King Liao killed—so it was an age in flux, one in which survival
depended upon bold action, and the Confucian emphasis upon propriety
had not yet arisen. The role of women in the military also remains unclear,
though there are later references to pressing them into service when
required.193
   A second group of bamboo strips (called the “King of Wu’s Questions”)
contains a much more legible record of King Ho-lü questioning Sun-tzu
about the state of Chin. This interview, which is fully translated in the
section of selected lost materials appended to our translation of the Art of
War, predicts the sequence in which the ministerial families of Chin would
perish from their internecine strife. Since his predictions were not
completely accurate, some scholars assume the piece was written by the
Sun family after the first few came true, but before their predictions went
askew, and therefore in the latter half of the fifth century B.C., or about
fifty years after Sun-tzu should have been active.194 Whether this dating
is accepted depends upon the likelihood that Sun-tzu could have
accurately predicted the initial events. If they were fairly obvious, as they
appear to have been, Sun-tzu himself could have easily foreseen them,
particularly after bringing his analytical methods to bear. There is clearly
no need to assume he would be completely wrong unless he lived after the
fact!
   The above then summarizes the main textual materials regarding Sun-
tzu and his possible existence. There is an additional tradition regarding
his background and family history that developed from the T’ang onward,
and has similarly become the focus of fervent debate.195 The Shih chi
biography identifies Sun-tzu as a native of Ch’i rather than Wu, and the
T’ang reconstruction traces his lineage back to the T’ien clan that had
risen to power in Ch’i after the reign of Duke Huan, China’s first
hegemon. Sun Wu’s grandfather, as a reward for military achievement in a
campaign against Lü, was granted the surname of “Sun” and apparently
enfeoffed at Le-an.196 While the T’ien clan was among the four major
ones energetically contending for power in Ch’i, since they were largely
successful (with their allies, the Pao clan) the question arises why Sun Wu
would have fled or migrated to Wu, only to remain unknown until
befriended by Wu Tzu-hsü. Clearly his family’s military background
provided him with expertise equally useful to his own clan then immersed
in Ch’i’s turmoil.


        COMPOSITION AND DATING OF THE TEXT

  While traditionalists continue to assert that the historical Sun Wu
portrayed in the Shih chi and Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu actually composed the
Art of War—and often won’t even allow for subsequent revisions by his
own hand—other scholars have identified numerous historical
anachronisms in the extant text encompassing terms, events, technology,
and philosophical concepts;197 emphasized the absence of any evidence
corroborating his strategic role in the wars between Wu and Yüeh, as
reviewed above; and focused on the disparity between the advanced
concepts and nature of large-scale warfare discussed in the Art of War and
the more limited, primitive battles characteristic of the latter part of the
sixth century B.C.198
  The traditionalist interpretation derives critical support from the
numerous Art of War passages visible in most other military writings
because, it is asserted, such extensive borrowing could only have been
possible from the earliest text.199 Moreover, this widespread copying is
thought to provide ample evidence that the Art of War was early on
considered the most important military treatise, valued far more than any
other work, oral or written. The origination of certain analytical concepts,
such as terrain classification, is also credited to Sun-tzu; therefore their
utilization, by the compilers of the Ssu-ma Fa, is thought to prove
indisputably Sun-tzu’s historical priority rather than the possibility that
Sun-tzu benefited from other works.
   However, even if the likelihood of later accretions and revisions is
disregarded, the traditionalist position still ignores the development and
existence of more than two thousand years of warfare and tactics prior to
500 B.C., attributing the virtual creation of military strategy to Sun-tzu
alone.200 The concise, often abstract nature of his passages is cited as
evidence that the book was composed at an early stage in the development
of Chinese writing, but an equally compelling argument can be advanced
that only upon a foundation of extensive battlefield experience and a solid
tradition of serious military contemplation could such a philosophically
sophisticated style be possible.201 Basic concepts and common passages
would seem to argue for a comprehensive military tradition and evolving
expertise, rather than creation ex nihilo.
  Critics who believe the scope of warfare evident in the Art of War far
exceeds that which characterized the late Spring and Autumn period focus
on Sun-tzu’s discussion of the fiscal difficulties and impact of mobilizing a
hundred-thousand-man army accompanied by two thousand chariots.202
In their view, battles in Sun-tzu’s era consisted of approximately thirty
thousand to forty thousand troops per side, and a few hundred to several
hundred chariots per army. (These numbers are consistent with the battle
descriptions already excerpted above from the Tso chuan, Shih chi, and Wu
Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu. In comparison, Napoleon had a core force of 72,000
troops at Waterloo, Wellington 68,000.) Moreover, actual battlefield
engagements still required only a day; the running series of battles
resulting in the conquest of Ying consumed about ten days. While months
could be necessary to transport an army deep into enemy territory,
prolonged campaigns of such magnitude were still exceptional. Therefore,
from their perspective Sun-tzu’s discussion of lengthy campaigns and
massive armies must reflect the stage of warfare found in the middle of the
Warring States period, and not the more primitive Spring and Autumn.203
  Furthermore, contrary to the nine months required to mount a siege
according to the Art of War,204 protracted sieges were unknown in the
Spring and Autumn period because cities were small and little fortified.
However, in the Warring States period they had become important,
strongly fortified economic and strategic centers, and Sun Pin had already
categorized them in his own work, Military Methods, into worthwhile and
defensible objectives. Therefore, unlike in the Spring and Autumn period
(as discussed in the general introduction), an invasion force could not
simply circumvent them, but had at least to nullify their strategic potential
—a task that required specialized equipment, adequate preparation, and
great staying power. Accordingly, the Art of War is characterized as
reflecting Warring States siege warfare rather than Spring and Autumn
practices.205
  Their other criticisms focus on the forms of military organization and
Sun-tzu’s extensive emphasis on speed and mobility, both seen as more
appropriate to infantry than chariot warfare. 206 In addition, the rise of the
profession of arms is clearly witnessed in assertions about the
commander’s necessary independence, and they assert—contrary to our
conclusions in the general introduction and above—that rulers did not
divorce themselves from the responsibilities of field command until the
Warring States. 207 Finally, certain scholars deny that deceit and
unorthodox tactics were ever employed in Spring and Autumn conflicts,
apparently assuming all engagements were entered only after the two
armies had properly arrayed themselves on the field (as they had very
early in the period, in the north). 208 This seems quite puzzling since even
the historical battle descriptions explored above clearly show the
ingenious use of both deception and unorthodox tactics.
   While their enumeration of apparent anachronisms is impressive, other
reconstructions of the evolution of strategy and warfare reach significantly
different conclusions. For example, the increased specialization of officers
and troops, the more extensive employment of infantry, and the new
emphasis on speed and mobility may all be seen as ongoing changes found
in the last years of the Spring and Autumn period.209 Moreover, assaults
on cities in that era were not yet advisable because the economic and
strategic rewards were inadequate to repay the efforts. The bronze
weapons of the time, being designed for close combat, are also seen as
insufficient for undertaking the task, since siege specialization and iron
implements had not yet developed. State economies in the period would
simply have been incapable of sustaining extensive campaigns, thereby
accounting for Sun-tzu’s emphasis upon speed rather than duration.210
   Unmentioned by these scholars but perhaps important, Sun-tzu may
simply have employed large, round numbers in his discussion, or late
hands may have actively revised the text to accord with the practices of
their generation. Also undiscussed is the possible regional character of his
observations and theories, reflecting the historical priority of infantry and
naval forces in Wu, and tactics designed to accommodate terrain
limitations. (However, this equally entails a problem: why are the tactics
appropriate to water warfare only minimally discussed in the Art of War?)
Then most of the above objections would be moot, allowing for the kernel
of the work to have been composed by Sun-tzu, and the redaction revised
over the years by his family and disciples to reflect evolving
developments.
   Excluding the now untenable position of those skeptics who dismissed
the book as a late fabrication,211 three major views seem to prevail
regarding the composition date for the Art of War. The first identifies it
with the historical Sun Wu, final compilation occurring shortly after his
death in the early fifth century B.C.212 The second, based upon internal
evidence, consigns it to the middle to late Warring States period, or the
fourth to third centuries B.C.213 The third, also founded on internal
evidence supplemented by recently discovered texts, places it somewhere
in the last half of the fifth century B.C.214 Since these are issues mainly
of interest to specialists, the details are briefly considered in the
accompanying footnotes.
   One additional view remains to be noted: Chang Ch’i-yün’s variation on
the nonexistence of Sun Wu. Chang advances the intriguing theory that
Wu Tzu-hsü is the actual progenitor of the Art of War, and that “Sun Wu
was probably the name of a book and not a person’s name, referring to the
military classic transmitted through generations by the Sun family, just
like speaking of the Mao recension of the Shih ching (Book of Odes).”215
Chang cites as probable evidence the consignment of Wu’s son to the Pao
clan in Ch’i, from where Sun Pin later came. Moreover, his son apparently
assumed the surname of the Sun clan, and the final version of the Art of
War would probably have derived from Sun Pin’s hand. Of course this was
written prior to the discovery of the Lin-i tomb text of the Art of War,
which contained about one third of the current material, arranged in
essentially the same thirteen-chapter format, and fragments of Sun Pin’s
own work that clearly show technological and tactical advances. The late
Chang would probably revise his view, particularly as over the centuries
people had conflated the works of the two Suns, rather than viewing them
as distinct individuals and authors.
   A balanced view—taking into account the evolving nature of warfare,
the rising need for military and bureaucratic specialization, the
personalities involved, the complexity of the politics, and the fragility of
recorded materials—might well conclude that the historical Sun Wu
existed, and not only served as a strategist and possibly general, but also
composed the core of the book that bears his name. Thereafter the
essential teachings were perhaps transmitted within the family or a close-
knit school of disciples, being improved and revised with the passing
decades, while gradually gaining wider dissemination. The early text may
even have been edited by his famous descendant Sun Pin, who also
extensively employed its teachings in his own Military Methods, and
simultaneously made the Sun name even more glorious.
         Sun-tzu

The Art of War In Translation
                         1


                Initial Estimations 1


Sun-tzu said:
  “Warfare is the greatest affair of state, the basis of life and death, the
Way (Tao) to survival or extinction. It must be thoroughly pondered and
analyzed.
  •••
  “Therefore, structure it according to [the following] five factors,
evaluate it comparatively through estimations, and seek out its true
nature.2 The first is termed the Tao, the second Heaven, the third Earth,
the fourth generals, and the fifth the laws [for military organization and
discipline].

  “The Tao3 causes the people to be fully in accord with the ruler.4
[Thus] they will die with him; they will live with him and not fear
danger.5
   “Heaven encompasses yin and yang, cold and heat, and the constraints
of the seasons.6
  “Earth encompasses far or near, difficult or easy, expansive or
confined, fatal or tenable terrain.7
  “The general encompasses wisdom, credibility, benevolence, courage,
and strictness.
   “The laws [for military organization and discipline] encompass
organization and regulations, the Tao of command, and the management
of logistics.8
  “There are no generals who have not heard of these five. Those who
understand them will be victorious; those who do not understand them
will not be victorious.
  •••
  “Thus when making a comparative evaluation through estimations,
seeking out its true nature, ask:
        Which ruler has the Tao?
        Which general has greater ability?
        Who has gained [the advantages of] Heaven and Earth?
        Whose laws and orders are more thoroughly imple- mented?
        Whose forces9 are stronger?
        Whose officers and troops are better trained?
        Whose rewards and punishments are clearer?
  “From these I will know victory and defeat!
  •••
  “If a general follows my [methods for] estimation and you employ
him, he will certainly be victorious and should be retained. If a general
does not follow my [methods for] estimation and you employ him, he
will certainly be defeated, so dismiss him.10
  •••
  “After estimating the advantages in accord with what you have heard,
put it into effect with strategic power (shih)11 supplemented by field
tactics that respond to external factors.12 As for strategic power, [it is]
controlling the tactical imbalance of power (ch’üan) in accord with the
gains to be realized.13
  •••

  “Warfare is the Way (Tao) of deception.14 Thus although [you are]
capable, display incapability to them. When committed to employing
your forces, feign inactivity. When [your objective] is nearby, make it
appear as if distant; when far away, create the illusion of being nearby.15
  •••
   “Display profits to entice them. Create disorder [in their forces] and
take them.16

   “If they are substantial,17 prepare for them; if they are strong, avoid
them.

   “If they are angry, perturb them;18 be deferential to foster their
arrogance.19
  “If they are rested, force them to exert themselves.
  “If they are united, cause them to be separated.
  “Attack where they are unprepared.
  “Go forth where they will not expect it.
  “These are the ways military strategists are victorious. They cannot be
spoken of in advance.20
  •••
   “Before the engagement, one who determines in the ancestral temple
that he will be victorious has found that the majority of factors are in his
favor. Before the engagement one who determines in the ancestral
temple that he will not be victorious has found few factors are in his
favor.
   “If one who finds that the majority of factors favor him will be
victorious while one who has found few factors favor him will be
defeated, what about someone who finds no factors in his favor? 21
  “If I observe it from this perspective, victory and defeat will be
apparent.”
                    2

                Waging War


Sun-tzu said:
   “In general, the strategy for employing the military [is this]:22 If there
are one thousand four-horse attack chariots, one thousand leather-
armored support chariots,23 one hundred thousand mailed troops, and
provisions are transported one thousand li, then the domestic and
external campaign expenses, the expenditures for advisers and guests,
materials such as glue and lacquer, and providing chariots and armor will
be one thousand pieces of gold per day. Only then can an army of one
hundred thousand be mobilized.
  •••
  “When employing them in battle, a victory that is long in coming will
blunt their weapons and dampen their ardor.24 If you attack cities, their
strength will be exhausted.25 If you expose the army to a prolonged
campaign, the state’s resources will be inadequate.
   “When the weapons have grown dull and spirits depressed, when our
strength has been expended and resources consumed, then the feudal
lords will take advantage of our exhaustion to arise.26 Even though you
have wise generals, they will not be able to achieve a good result.
   “Thus in military campaigns I have heard of awkward speed but have
never seen any skill in lengthy campaigns. No country has ever profited
from protracted warfare.27 Those who do not thoroughly comprehend
the dangers inherent in employing the army are incapable of truly
knowing the potential advantages of military actions.
  •••
  “One who excels in employing the military does not conscript the
people twice or transport provisions a third time.28 If you obtain your
equipment from within the state and rely on seizing provisions from the
enemy, then the army’s foodstuffs will be sufficient.
   “The state is impoverished by the army when it transports provisions
far off. When provisions are transported far off, the hundred surnames29
are impoverished.

 “Those in proximity to the army will sell their goods expensively. 30
When goods are expensive, the hundred surnames’ wealth will be
exhausted. When their wealth is exhausted, they will be extremely hard-
pressed [to supply] their village’s military impositions.31
   “When their strength has been expended and their wealth depleted,
then the houses in the central plains will be empty.32 The expenses of
the hundred surnames will be some seventenths33 of whatever they
have. The ruler’s irrecoverable expenditures—such as ruined chariots,
exhausted horses, armor, helmets, arrows and crossbows, halberd-tipped
and spear-tipped [large, movable] protective shields, strong oxen,34 and
large wagons—will consume six-tenths of his resources.
   “Thus the wise general will concentrate on securing provisions from
the enemy.35 One bushel of the enemy’s foodstuffs is worth twenty of
ours; one picul of fodder is worth twenty of ours.
  •••
   “Thus what [motivates men] to slay the enemy is anger; what
[stimulates them] to seize profits36 from the enemy is material goods.
Thus in chariot encounters, when ten or more chariots are captured,
reward the first to get one. Change their flags and pennants to ours;
intermix and employ them with our own chariots. Treat the captured
soldiers well in order to nurture them [for our use]. This is referred to as
‘conquering the enemy and growing stronger.’
  •••
   “Thus the army values being victorious; it does not value prolonged
warfare. Therefore, a general who understands warfare is Master of Fate
for the people, ruler of the state’s security or endangerment.”
                        3

                Planning Offensives


Sun-tzu said:
   “In general, the method for employing the military is this: Preserving
the [enemy’s] state capital is best, destroying their state capital second-
best.37 Preserving their army is best, destroying their army second-best.
Preserving their battalions is best, destroying their battalions second-
best.38 Preserving their companies is best, destroying their companies
second-best. Preserving their squads is best, destroying their squads
second-best. For this reason attaining one hundred victories in one
hundred battles is not the pinnacle of excellence. Subjugating the
enemy’s army without fighting is the true pinnacle of excellence.
  •••
   “Thus the highest realization of warfare is to attack the enemy’s plans;
next is to attack their alliances; next to attack their army; and the lowest
is to attack their fortified cities.
  “This tactic of attacking fortified cities is adopted only when
unavoidable. Preparing large movable protective shields, armored assault
wagons, and other equipment and devices will require three months.
Building earthworks39 will require another three months to complete. If
the general cannot overcome his impatience but instead launches an
assault wherein his men swarm over the walls like ants, he will kill one-
third of his officers and troops, and the city will still not be taken. This is
the disaster that results from attacking [fortified cities].
   “Thus one who excels at employing the military subjugates other
people’s armies without engaging in battle, captures other people’s
fortified cities without attacking them, and destroys others people’s states
without prolonged fighting. He must fight under Heaven with the
paramount aim of ‘preservation. ’40 Thus his weapons will not become
dull, and the gains can be preserved. This is the strategy for planning
offensives.
  •••
   “In general, the strategy for employing the military is this: If your
strength is ten times theirs, surround them; if five, then attack them; if
double, then divide your forces.41 If you are equal in strength to the
enemy, you can engage him. If fewer, you can circumvent him. If
outmatched, you can avoid him. Thus a small enemy that acts
inflexibly42 will become the captives of a large enemy.
  •••
   “The general is the supporting pillar of state. If his talents are all-
encompassing, the state will invariably be strong. If the supporting pillar
is marked by fissures, the state will invariably grow weak.43
  •••
   “Thus there are three ways by which an army is put into difficulty by a
ruler:44
        “He does not know that the Three Armies should not advance but
        instructs them to advance or does not know that the Three Armies
        should not withdraw and orders a retreat. This is termed
        ‘entangling the army.’
        “He does not understand the Three Armies’ military affairs but
        [directs them] in the same way as his [civil] administration.45
        Then the officers will become confused.
        “He does not understand the Three Armies’ tactical balance of
        power (ch’üan) but undertakes responsibility for command. Then
        the officers will be doubtful.
“When the Three Armies are already confused and doubtful, the danger
of the feudal lords [taking advantage of the situation] arises. This is
referred to as ‘a disordered army drawing another on to victory.’46
  •••

  “Thus there are five factors from which victory can be known:47
        “One who knows when he can fight, and when he cannot fight,
        will be victorious.

        “One who recognizes48 how to employ large and small numbers
        will be victorious.
        “One whose upper and lower ranks have the same desires will be
        victorious.
        “One who, fully prepared, awaits the unprepared will be
        victorious.
        “One whose general is capable and not interfered with by the
        ruler will be victorious.
“These five are the Way (Tao) to know victory.
  •••

  “Thus it is said that one who knows the enemy and knows himself49
will not be endangered in a hundred engagements. One who does not
know the enemy but knows himself will sometimes be victorious,
sometimes meet with defeat. One who knows neither the enemy nor
himself will invariably be defeated in every engagement.”
                          4


                Military Disposition50


Sun-tzu said:
  “In antiquity those that excelled in warfare first made themselves
unconquerable51 in order to await [the moment when] the enemy could
be conquered.
   “Being unconquerable lies with yourself; being conquerable lies with
the enemy.

  “Thus one who excels in warfare52 is able to make himself
unconquerable, but cannot necessarily cause the enemy to be
conquerable.
  “Thus it is said a strategy for conquering the enemy can be known but
yet not possible to implement.
  •••
   “One who cannot be victorious assumes a defensive posture; one who
can be victorious attacks. In these circumstances by assuming a
defensive posture, strength will be more than adequate, whereas in
offensive actions it would be inadequate.53
  •••
  “Those who excel at defense bury themselves away below the lowest
depths of Earth. Those who excel at offense54 move from above the
greatest heights of Heaven. Thus they are able to preserve themselves
and attain complete victory.
  “Perceiving a victory that does not surpass what the masses could
know is not the pinnacle of excellence. Wrestling victories for which All
under Heaven proclaim your excellence is not the pinnacle of
excellence.55
  “Thus lifting an autumn hare cannot be considered great strength;
seeing the sun and moon cannot be considered acute vision; hearing the
sound of thunder cannot be considered having sensitive ears.

   “Those that the ancients56 referred to as excelling at warfare
conquered those who were easy to conquer. Thus the victories of those
that excelled in warfare were not marked by fame for wisdom or
courageous achievement.57 Thus their victories were free from errors.
One who is free from errors directs his measures toward [certain] victory,
conquering those who are already defeated.
  •••
   “Thus one who excels at warfare first establishes himself in a position
where he cannot be defeated while not losing [any opportunity] to defeat
the enemy.
   “For this reason, the victorious army first realizes the conditions for
victory, and then seeks to engage in battle. The vanquished army fights
first, and then seeks victory.
  •••

  “One58 who excels at employing the military cultivates the Tao59 and
preserves the laws; therefore, he is able to be the regulator of victory and
defeat.60
  •••

  “As for military methods:61 the first is termed measurement; the
second, estimation [of forces]; the third, calculation [of numbers of
men]; the fourth, weighing [relative strength]; and the fifth, victory.

   “Terrain gives birth to measurement;62 measurement produces the
estimation [of forces].63 Estimation [of forces] gives rise to calculating
[the numbers of men]. Calculating [the numbers of men] gives rise to
weighing [strength]. Weighing [strength] gives birth to victory.
  •••
   “Thus the victorious army is like a ton compared with an ounce, while
the defeated army is like an ounce weighed against a ton! The combat of
the victorious64 is like the sudden release of a pent-up torrent down a
thousand-fathom gorge. This is the strategic disposition of force
(hsing).”65
                            5


                Strategic Military Power 66


Sun-tzu said:
   “In general, commanding a large number is like commanding a few. It
is a question of dividing up the numbers. Fighting with a large number is
like fighting with a few. It is a question of configuration and
designation.67
  •••
   “What enable the masses of the Three Armies invariably to withstand
the enemy without being defeated are the unorthodox (ch’i) and orthodox
(cheng). 68
  “If wherever the army attacks it is like a whetstone thrown against an
egg, it is due to the vacuous and substantial.69
   “In general, in battle one engages with the orthodox and gains victory
through the unorthodox. Thus one who excels at sending forth the
unorthodox is as inexhaustible as Heaven,70 as unlimited as the Yangtze
and Yellow rivers.71 What reach an end and begin again are the sun and
moon. What die and are reborn72 are the four seasons.

   “The notes do not exceed five, but the changes73 of the five notes can
never be fully heard. The colors do not exceed five, but the changes of
the five colors can never be completely seen. The flavors do not exceed
five, but the changes of the five flavors can never be completely tasted.
In warfare the strategic configurations of power (shih) do not exceed the
unorthodox and orthodox, but the changes of the unorthodox and
orthodox can never be completely exhausted. The unorthodox and
orthodox mutually produce each other, just like an endless cycle.74 Who
can exhaust them?
  •••
   “The strategic configuration of power (shih) [is visible in] the onrush
of pent-up75 water tumbling stones along. The [effect of] constraints76
[is visible in] the onrush77 of a bird of prey breaking the bones of its
[target]. Thus the strategic configuration of power (shih) of those that
excel in warfare is sharply focused, their constraints are precise.78 Their
strategic configuration of power (shih) is like a fully drawn crossbow,
their constraints like the release of the trigger.
  •••
“Intermixed and turbulent, the fighting appears chaotic, but they cannot
be made disordered.79 In turmoil and confusion, their deployment is
circular,80 and they cannot be defeated.
  •••

   “[Simulated] chaos is given birth from control;81 [the illusion of] fear
is given birth from courage; [feigned] weakness is given birth from
strength. Order and disorder are a question of numbers; courage and fear
are a question of the strategic configuration of power (shih); strength and
weakness are a question of the deployment [of forces] (hsing).
  “Thus one who excels at moving the enemy deploys in a configuration
(hsing) to which the enemy must respond. He offers something that the
enemy must seize. With profit he moves them, with the foundation82 he
awaits them.
  •••
   “Thus one who excels at warfare seeks [victory] through the strategic
configuration of power (shih), not from reliance on men. Thus he is able
to select men and employ strategic power (shih).83
  •••
   “One who employs strategic power (shih) commands men in battle as
if he were rolling logs and stones. The nature of wood and stone is to be
quiet when stable but to move when on precipitous ground. If they are
square they stop, if round they tend to move. Thus the strategic power
(shih) of one who excels at employing men in warfare is comparable to
rolling round boulders down a thousand-fathom mountain. Such is the
strategic configuration of power (shih).”
                           6


                Vacuity and Substance 84


Sun-tzu said:
  “In general, whoever occupies the battleground first and awaits the
enemy will be at ease; whoever occupies the battleground afterward and
must race to the conflict will be fatigued. Thus one who excels at warfare
compels men and is not compelled by other men.85
  •••
  “In order to cause the enemy to come of their own volition, extend
some [apparent] profit. In order to prevent the enemy from coming forth,
show them [the potential] harm.
  •••
  “Thus if the enemy is rested you can tire him; if he is well fed you can
make him hungry; if he is at rest you can move him. Go forth to
positions to which he must race.86 Race forth where he does not expect
it.87
  •••
  “To travel a thousand li without becoming fatigued, traverse
unoccupied terrain. To ensure taking the objective in an attack, strike
positions that are undefended. To be certain of an impregnable defense,
secure positions that the enemy will not attack.88
   “Thus when someone excels in attacking, the enemy does not know
where to mount his defense; when someone excels at defense, the enemy
does not know where to attack. Subtle! Subtle! It approaches the
formless.89 Spiritual! Spiritual! It attains the soundless. Thus he can be
the enemy’s Master of Fate.
  •••

   “To effect an unhampered90 advance, strike their vacuities. To effect a
retreat that cannot be overtaken, employ unmatchable speed.91 Thus if I
want to engage in combat, even though the enemy has high ramparts and
deep moats, he cannot avoid doing battle because I attack objectives he
must rescue.
   “If I do not want to engage in combat, even though I merely draw a
line on the ground and defend it, he will not be able to engage me in
battle because we thwart his movements.
  •••
  “Thus if I determine the enemy’s disposition of forces (hsing) while I
have no perceptible form,92 I can concentrate [my forces] while the
enemy is fragmented. If we are concentrated into a single force while he
is fragmented into ten, then we attack him with ten times his strength.
Thus we are many and the enemy is few. If we can attack his few with
our many, those who we engage in battle will be severely constrained.
  •••
   “The location where we will engage the enemy must not become
known to them. If it is not known, then the positions they must prepare to
defend will be numerous. If the positions the enemy prepares to defend
are numerous, then the forces we will engage will be few. Thus if they
prepare to defend the front, to the rear there will be few men. If they
defend the rear, in the front there will be few. If they prepare to defend
the left flank, then on the right there will be few men. If they prepare to
defend the right flank, then on the left there will be few men. If there is
no position left undefended, then there will not be any place with more
than a few. The few [are the ones] who prepare against others; the many
[are the ones] who make others prepare against them.93
  •••
  “Thus if one knows the field of battle and knows the day of battle, he
can traverse a thousand li and assemble to engage in combat.94 If he
does not know the field of battle nor know the day for battle, then the left
flank cannot aid the right nor the right flank aid the left; the front cannot
aid the rear nor the rear aid the front.95 How much more so when the
distant are some tens of li away and the near several li apart? As I
analyze it, even though Yüeh’s army is numerous, of what great
advantage is it to them for attaining victory?96 Thus I say victory can be
achieved.97 Even though the enemy is more numerous, they can be
forced not to fight.
  •••
“Thus critically analyze them to know the estimations for gain and loss.
Stimulate them to know the patterns of their movement and stopping.
Determine their disposition of force (hsing) to know the tenable and fatal
terrain. Probe them to know where they have an excess, where an
insufficiency.98
   “Thus the pinnacle of military deployment approaches the formless. If
it is formless, then even the deepest spy cannot discern it or the wise
make plans against it.
  •••
   “In accord with the enemy’s disposition (hsing) we impose measures
on the masses that produce victory, but the masses are unable to fathom
them. Men all know the disposition (hsing) by which we attain victory,
but no one knows the configuration (hsing) through which we control the
victory. Thus a victorious battle [strategy] is not repeated, the
configurations (hsing) of response [to the enemy] are inexhaustible.99
  •••

  “Now the army’s disposition of force (hsing)100 is like water. Water’s
configuration (hsing)101 avoids heights and races downward. The
army’s disposition of force (hsing) avoids the substantial and strikes the
vacuous. Water configures (hsing) its flow102 in accord with the terrain;
the army controls its victory in accord with the enemy. Thus the army
does not maintain any constant103 strategic configuration of power
(shih), water104 has no constant shape (hsing). One who is able to
change and transform in accord with the enemy and wrest victory is
termed spiritual.105 Thus [none of] the five phases constantly
dominates; the four seasons do not have constant positions; the sun
shines for longer and shorter periods; and the moon wanes and
waxes.”106
                        7


                Military Combat 107


Sun-tzu said:
   “In general, the strategy for employing the army is this: [From the
time] the general receives his commands from the ruler, unites the
armies, and assembles the masses, to confronting the enemy and
encamping, there is nothing more difficult than military combat. In
military combat what is most difficult is turning the circuitous into the
straight, turning adversity into advantage.
   “Thus if you make the enemy’s path circuitous and entice them with
profit, although you set out after them you will arrive before them. This
results from knowing the tactics108 of the circuitous and the direct.
  •••
  “Thus combat between armies is advantageous; combat between
masses is dangerous.109 If the entire army contends for advantage, you
will not arrive in time. If you reduce the army’s size to contend for
advantage, your baggage and heavy equipment will suffer losses.
  “For this reason if you abandon your armor [and heavy equipment]
110 to race forward day and night without encamping, covering two days
normal distance at a time, marching forward a hundred li to contend for
gain, the Three Armies’ generals will be captured. The strong will be
first to arrive, while the exhausted will follow. With such tactics only one
in ten will reach [the battle site]. If one contends for gain fifty li away, it
will cause the general of the Upper Army to stumble, and by following
such tactics half the men will reach [the objective]. If you contend for
gain at thirty li, then two-thirds of the army will reach [the objective].
  “Accordingly, if the army does not have baggage and heavy
equipment it will be lost; if it does not have provisions it will be lost; if it
does not have stores it will be lost.
  •••
  Thus one who does not know the plans of the feudal lords cannot
prepare alliances beforehand. Someone unfamiliar with the mountains
and forests, gorges and defiles, the shape of marshes and wetlands
cannot advance the army. One who does not employ local guides cannot
gain advantages of terrain.111
  •••
  “Thus the army is established by deceit, moves for advantage, and
changes through segmenting and reuniting. Thus its speed is like the
wind, its slowness like the forest; its invasion and plundering like a fire;
unmoving, it is like the mountains. It is as difficult to know as the
darkness; in movement it is like thunder.
  •••
 “When you plunder a district, divide the wealth among your troops.
When you enlarge your territory, divide the profits.112 Take control of
the strategic balance of power (ch’üan) and move. The one who first
understands the tactics of the circuitous and the direct will be victorious.
This is the strategy for military combat.
  •••
   “The Military Administration states: ‘Because they could not hear
each other they made gongs and drums; because they could not see each
other they made pennants and flags.’ Gongs, drums, pennants, and flags
are the means to unify the men’s ears and eyes. When the men have been
unified the courageous will not be able to advance alone, the fearful will
not be able to retreat alone. This is the method for employing large
numbers.113
  “Thus in night battles make the fires and drums numerous, and in
daylight battles make the flags and pennants numerous in order to
change the men’s ears and eyes.114
  •••
  “The ch’i of the Three Armies can be snatched away; the commanding
general’s mind can be seized. For this reason in the morning their ch’i is
ardent; during the day their ch’i becomes indolent; at dusk their ch’i is
exhausted.115 Thus one who excels at employing the army avoids their
ardent ch’i and strikes when it is indolent or exhausted. This is the way
to manipulate ch’i.116
  •••
   “In order await the disordered; in tranquility await the clamorous. This
is the way to control the mind.
  •••
  “With the near await the distant; with the rested await the fatigued;
with the sated await the hungry. This is the way to control strength.
  •••
   “Do not intercept well-ordered flags; do not attack well-regulated
formations.117 This is the way to control changes.
  •••
 “Thus the strategy for employing the military: Do not approach high
mountains; do not confront118 those who have hills behind them. Do not
pursue feigned retreats.119 Do not attack animated troops. Do not
swallow an army acting as bait. Do not obstruct an army retreating
homeward. 120 If you besiege an army you must leave an outlet.121 Do
not press an exhausted invader. These are the strategies for employing
the military.”122
                                   8


                          Nine Changes123


Sun-tzu said:


  “In general, the strategy for employing the military is this. After the
general has received his commands from the ruler, united the armies, and
assembled the masses: 124
        “Do not encamp on entrapping terrain.125
        “Unite with your allies on focal terrain.126
        “Do not remain on isolated terrain.
        “Make strategic plans for encircled terrain.
        “On fatal terrain you must do battle. 127
        “There are roads that are not followed. 128
        “There are armies that are not attacked.
        “There are fortified cities that are not assaulted.129
        “There is terrain for which one does not contend.130
        “There are commands from the ruler that are not accepted.131
“Thus the general who has a penetrating understanding of the advantages
of the nine changes knows how to employ the army. If a general does not
have a penetrating understanding of the advantages of the nine changes,
even though he is familiar with the topography, he will not be able to
realize the advantages of terrain.
   “One who commands an army but does not know the techniques for
the nine changes, even though he is familiar with the five advantages,132
will not be able to control men.
  •••
   “For this reason the wise must contemplate the intermixture of gain
and loss. If they discern advantage [in difficult situations], their efforts
can be trusted. If they discern harm [in prospective advantage],
difficulties can be resolved.
  •••
  “Accordingly, subjugate the feudal lords with potential harm; labor the
feudal lords with numerous affairs; and have the feudal lords race after
profits.
  •••
“Thus the strategy for employing the army: Do not rely on their not
coming, but depend on us having the means to await them. Do not rely
on their not attacking, but depend on us having an unassailable
position.133
       •••
       “Thus generals have five dangerous [character traits]:
       “One committed to dying can be slain.
       “One committed to living can be captured.
       “One [easily] angered and hasty [to act] can be insulted.
       “One obsessed with being scrupulous and untainted can be
       shamed.
       “One who loves the people can be troubled.
   “Now these five dangerous traits are excesses in a general, potential
disaster for employing the army. The army’s destruction and the
general’s death will invariably stem from these five, so they must be
investigated.”134
                                 9

                     Maneuvering the Army


Sun-tzu said:
       “As for deploying the army and fathoming the enemy:
         “To cross mountains follow the valleys, search out tenable
       ground,135 and occupy the heights. If the enemy holds the
        heights, do not climb up to engage them in battle. This is the way
        to deploy an army in the mountains.136

           “After crossing rivers137 you must distance yourself from
        them. If the enemy is fording a river to advance, do not confront
        them in the water. When half their forces have crossed, it will be
        advantageous to strike them. If you want to engage the enemy in
        battle, do not array your forces near the river to confront the
        invader but look for tenable ground and occupy the heights. Do
        not confront the current’s flow.138 This is the way to deploy the
        army where there are rivers.
          “When you cross salt marshes and wetlands, concentrate on
        quickly getting away from them; do not remain. If you engage in
        battle in marshes or wetlands, you must stay in areas with marsh
        grass and keep groves of trees at your back. This is the way to
        deploy the army in marshes and wetlands.139

           “On level plains deploy on easy140 terrain with the right flank
        positioned with high ground to the rear, fatal terrain to the fore,
        and tenable terrain to the rear. This is the way to deploy on the
        plains.
“These four [deployments], advantageous to the army, are the means by
which the Yellow Emperor conquered the four emperors.141
  •••
  “Now the army likes heights and abhors low areas, esteems the sunny
(yang) and disdains the shady (yin). It nourishes life and occupies the
substantial.142 An army that avoids the hundred illnesses is said to be
certain of victory.143
  •••
   “Where there are hills and embankments you must occupy the yang
side, keeping them to the right rear. This is to the army’s advantage and
[exploits the natural] assistance of the terrain.
  •••
  “When it rains upstream, foam appears.144 If you want to cross over,
wait until it settles.
  •••
  “You must quickly get away from deadly configurations of terrain
such as precipitous gorges with mountain torrents, Heaven’s Well,145
Heaven’s Jail,146 Heaven’s Net,147 Heaven’s Pit,148 and Heaven’s
Fissure.149 Do not approach them. When we keep them at a distance,
the enemy [is forced to] approach them. When we face them, the enemy
[is compelled to] have them at their rear.
  •••
  “When on the flanks the army encounters ravines and defiles,
wetlands with reeds and tall grass, mountain forests,150 or areas with
heavy, entangled undergrowth, you must thoroughly search them because
they are places where an ambush or spies would be concealed.151
  •••
   “If [an enemy] in close proximity remains quiet, they are relying on
their tactical occupation of ravines.152 If while far off they challenge
you to battle, they want you to advance [because] they occupy easy
terrain to their advantage.
  •••
  “If large numbers of trees move, they are approaching. If there are
many [visible] obstacles in the heavy grass, it is to make us
suspicious.153 If the birds take flight, there is an ambush. If the animals
are afraid, [enemy] forces are mounting a sudden attack.
  •••
   “If dust rises high up in a sharply defined column, chariots are
coming. If it is low and broad, the infantry is advancing. If it is dispersed
in thin shafts, they are gathering firewood. If it is sparse, coming and
going, they are encamping.
  “One who speaks deferentially but increases his preparations will
advance. One who speaks belligerently and advances hastily will retreat.
  “One whose light chariots first fan out to the sides is deploying [for
battle].154
  “One who seeks peace without setting any prior conditions is
[executing] a stratagem.
   “One whose troops race off but [who] deploys his army into formation
is implementing a predetermined schedule.
  “One [whose troops] half advance and half retreat is enticing you.
  •••
  “Those who stand about leaning on their weapons are hungry. If those
who draw water drink first, they are thirsty. When they see potential gain
but do not know whether to advance, they are tired.
  •••
   “Where birds congregate it is empty. If the enemy cries out at night,
they are afraid. If the army is turbulent,155 the general lacks severity. If
their flags and pennants move about, they are in chaos. If the officers are
angry, they are exhausted.
  •••

   “If they kill their horses and eat the meat, the army lacks grain.156 If
they hang up their cooking utensils and do not return to camp, they are
an exhausted invader.157
  •••
   “One whose troops repeatedly congregate in small groups here and
there, whispering together, has lost the masses. One who frequently
grants rewards is in deep distress. One who frequently imposes
punishments is in great difficulty. One who is at first excessively brutal
and then fears the masses is the pinnacle of stupidity.158
  •••
  “One who has emissaries come forth with offerings wants to rest for a
while.
  •••
   “If their troops are aroused and approach our forces, only to maintain
their positions without engaging in battle or breaking off the
confrontation, you must carefully investigate it.
  •••
  “The army does not esteem the number of troops being more
numerous for it only means one can not aggressively advance.159 It is
sufficient for you to muster your own strength, analyze the enemy, and
take them. Only someone who lacks strategic planning and slights an
enemy will inevitably be captured by others.
  •••
   “If you impose punishments on the troops before they have become
attached, they will not be submissive. If they are not submissive, they
will be difficult to employ. If you do not impose punishments after the
troops have become attached, they cannot be used.160
  •••

   “Thus if you command them with the civil161 and unify them through
the martial, this is what is referred to as ‘being certain to take them.’162
  •••
   “If orders are consistently implemented to instruct the people, then the
people will submit. If orders are not consistently implemented to instruct
the people, then the people will not submit. One whose orders are
consistently carried out has established a mutual relationship with the
people.”
                                   10


                   Configurations163 of Terrain


Sun-tzu said:


   “The major configurations (hsing) of terrain are accessible, suspended,
stalemated, constricted, precipitous, and expansive.
           “If we can go forth and the enemy can also advance, it is
        termed ‘accessible.’ In an accessible configuration, first occupy
        the heights and yang [side], and improve the routes for
        transporting provisions. Then when we engage in battle, it will be
        advantageous.
           “If we can go forth but it will be difficult to return, it is termed
        ‘suspended.’164 In a suspended configuration, if they are
        unprepared go forth and conquer them. If the enemy is prepared
        and we sally forth without being victorious, it will be difficult to
        turn back and [is] not advantageous.
           “If it is not advantageous for us to go forth nor advantageous
        for the enemy to come forward, it is termed “stalemated.”165 In a
        stalemated configuration, even though the enemy tries to entice
        us with profit, we do not go forth. Withdraw [our forces] and
        depart.166 If we strike them when half the enemy has come forth,
        it will be advantageous.
           “As for constricted configurations, if we occupy them first we
        must fully deploy throughout them in order to await the
        enemy.167 If the enemy occupies them first and fully deploys in
        them, do not follow them in. If they do not fully deploy in them,
        then follow them in.

          “As for precipitous configurations,168 if we occupy them we
        must hold the heights and yang sides to await the enemy. If the
        enemy occupies them first, withdraw [our forces] and depart. Do
        not follow them.
           “As for expansive configurations, if our strategic power(shih)
        is equal,169 it will be difficult to provoke [them to] combat.
        Engaging in combat will not be be advantageous.
   “Now these six are the Tao of terrain. Any general who undertakes
responsibility for command cannot but investigate them.
  •••
   “Thus there are [six types of ill-fated] armies: running [off], lax,
sinking, crumbling, chaotic, and routed. Now these six are not disasters
brought about by Heaven and Earth but by the general’s errors.
           “Now if, when their strategic power (shih) is equal, one attacks
        ten, this is called ‘running [off].’170
           “If the troops are strong but the officers are weak, it is termed
        ‘lax.’
           “If the officers are strong but the troops weak, it is termed
        ‘sinking.’
           “If the higher officers are angry and insubordinate, engaging
        the enemy themselves out of unrestrained anger while the general
        does not yet know their capability, it is termed ‘crumbling.’
            “If the general is weak and not strict, unenlightened in his
        instructions and leadership; the officers and troops lack constant
        [duties]; and their deployment of troops into formation is askew,
        it is termed ‘chaotic.’
           “If the general, unable to fathom the enemy, engages a large
        number with a small number, attacks the strong with the weak
        while the army lacks a properly selected vanguard, it is termed
        ‘routed.’
   “Now these six are the Tao of defeat. Any general who undertakes
responsibility for command cannot but investigate them.
  •••
   “Configuration of terrain is an aid to the army. Analyzing the enemy,
taking control of victory, estimating ravines and defiles, the distant and
near, is the Tao of the superior general. 171 One who knows these and
employs them in combat will certainly be victorious. One who does not
know these or employ them in combat will certainly be defeated.
  •••
   “If the Tao of Warfare [indicates] certain victory, even though the ruler
has instructed that combat should be avoided, if you must engage in
battle it is permissible. If the Tao of Warfare indicates you will not be
victorious, even though the ruler instructs you to engage in battle, not
fighting is permissible.
   “Thus [a general] who does not advance to seek fame, nor [fail to
retreat] to avoid [being charged with the capital] offense of retreating,
but seeks only to preserve the people and gain advantage for the ruler is
the state’s treasure.
  •••
   “When the general regards his troops as young children, they will
advance into the deepest valleys with him. When he regards the troops as
his beloved children, they will be willing to die with him.172
  “If they are well treated but cannot be employed, if they are loved but
cannot be commanded, or when in chaos they cannot be governed, they
may be compared to arrogant children and cannot be used.
  •••
   “If I know our troops can attack, but do not know the enemy cannot be
attacked, it is only halfway to victory. If I know the enemy can be
attacked, but do not realize our troops cannot attack, it is only halfway to
victory.
   “Knowing that the enemy can be attacked, and knowing that our army
can effect the attack, but not knowing the terrain is not suitable for
combat, is only halfway to victory. Thus one who truly knows the army
will never be deluded when he moves, never be impoverished when
initiating an action.
  “Thus it is said if you know them and know yourself, your victory will
not be imperiled. If you know Heaven and know Earth, your victory can
be complete. 173
                     11

                Nine Terrains


Sun-tzu said:
   “The strategy for employing the military is [this]: There is dispersive
terrain, light terrain, contentious terrain, traversable terrain, focal terrain,
heavy terrain, entrapping terrain, encircled terrain, and fatal terrain. 174
           “When the feudal lords fight in their own territory, it is
        ‘dispersive terrain.’175
           “When they enter someone else’s territory, but not deeply, it is
        ‘light terrain.’176
           “If when we occupy it, it will be advantageous to us while if
        they occupy it, it will be advantageous to them, it is ‘contentious
        terrain.’177
           “When we can go and they can also come, it is ‘traversable
        terrain.’178
           “Land of the feudal lords surrounded on three sides such that
        whoever arrives first will gain the masses of All under Heaven is
        ‘focal terrain.’179
          “When one penetrates deeply into enemy territory, bypassing
        numerous cities, it is ‘heavy terrain.’180
            “Where there are mountains and forests, ravines and defiles,
        wetlands and marshes, wherever the road is difficult to negotiate,
        it is ‘entrapping terrain.’181

          “Where the entrance is constricted,182 the return is circuitous,
        and with a small number they can strike our masses, it is
        ‘encircled terrain.’183
          “Where if one fights with intensity he will survive but if he
        does not fight with intensity he will perish, it is ‘fatal terrain.’184
        •••
        “For this reason on dispersive terrain do not engage the enemy.
        “On light terrain do not stop.

        “On contentious terrain do not attack.185
        “On traversable terrain do not allow your forces to become
        isolated.
        “On focal terrain unite and form alliances [with nearby feudal
        lords. ] 186
        “On heavy terrain plunder for provisions.

        “On entrapping terrain move [through quickly]. 187

        “On encircled terrain use strategy. 188
        “On fatal terrain engage in battle.
  •••
   “In antiquity those who were referred to as excelling in the
employment of the army were able to keep the enemy’s forward and rear
forces from connecting; the many and few from relying on each other;
the noble and lowly from coming to each other’s rescue; the upper and
lower ranks from trusting each other; the troops to be separated, unable
to reassemble, or when assembled, not to be well-ordered.189 They
moved when it was advantageous, halted when it was not advantageous.
  •••
  “If I dare ask, if the enemy is numerous, disciplined, and about to
advance, how should we respond to them? I would say, first seize
something that they love for then they will listen to you.
  •••
   “It is the nature of the army to stress speed; to take advantage of the
enemy’s absence; to travel unanticipated roads; and to attack when they
are not alert.
  •••
  “In general, the Tao of an invader is that when one has penetrated
deeply [into enemy territory], the army will be unified, and the defenders
will not be able to conquer you.
  •••
  “If one forages in the fertile countryside, then the Three Armies will
have enough to eat. If you carefully nurture them and do not [over-]labor
them, their ch’i will be united and their strength will be at maximum.
  •••
  “When you mobilize the army and form strategic plans, you must be
unfathomable.
  •••
  “Cast them into positions from which there is nowhere to go and they
will die without retreating. If there is no escape from death, the officers
and soldiers will fully exhaust their strength.
  •••
   “When the soldiers and officers have penetrated deeply into [enemy
territory], they will cling together. When there is no alternative, they will
fight.
  •••
  “For this reason even though the soldiers are not instructed, they are
prepared; without seeking it, their cooperation is obtained;190 without
covenants they are close together; without issuing orders they are
reliable. Prohibit omens, eliminate doubt so that they will die without
other thoughts.191
  •••
  “If our soldiers do not have excessive wealth, it is not because they
detest material goods. If they do not live long lives,192 it is not because
they abhor longevity. On the day that the orders are issued the tears of
the soldiers who are sitting will soak their sleeves, while the tears of
those lying down will roll down their cheeks. However, if you throw
them into a hopeless situation, they will have the courage of Chu or
Kuei.
  •••
  “Thus one who excels at employing the army may be compared to the
shuaijan [snake]. The shuaijan is found on Mt. Ch’ang. If you strike its
head the tail will respond; if you strike its tail the head will respond. If
you strike the middle [of the body]193 both the head and tail will react.
If I dare ask, can we make the army like the shuaijan, I would say we
can. For example, the people of Wu and Yüeh hate each other; but if,
when fording a river in the same boat they encounter severe wind, their
efforts to rescue each other will be like the left and right hands.
  •••

   “For this reason fettering the horses194 and burying the chariot wheels
are inadequate to rely on [to prevent the soldiers from fleeing.]. Unify
their courage to be as one through the Tao of administration. Realize the
appropriate employment of the hard and soft195 through the patterns of
terrain.
  •••
   “Thus one who excels at employing the army leads them by the hand
as if they were only one man, so they cannot avoid it.
  •••
   “It is essential for a general to be tranquil and obscure, upright and
self-disciplined, and able to stupefy the eyes and ears of the officers and
troops, keeping them ignorant.196 He alters his management of affairs
and changes his strategies to keep other people197 from recognizing
them. He shifts his position and traverses indirect routes to keep other
people from being able to anticipate him.
  •••
   “At the moment the general has designated with them, it will be as if
they ascended a height and abandoned their ladders. The general
advances with them deep into the territory of the feudal lords and then
releases the trigger.198 He commands them as if racing a herd of sheep
—they are driven away, driven back, but no one knows where they are
going.
  •••
  “Assembling the masses of the Three Armies, casting them into
danger, is the responsibility of the general.
  •••
  “The nine transformations of terrain—the advantages deriving from
contraction and expansion, the patterns of human emotions—must be
investigated.199
        •••

        “In general, the Tao of the invader is [this]:200
          “When the troops have penetrated deeply, they will be unified,
        but where only shallowly, they will [be inclined to] scatter.
          “When [the army] has left the state, crossed the [enemy’s]
        border, and is on campaign, it is ‘isolated terrain.’
           “When the four sides are open [to others], this is ‘focal
        terrain.’
          “When you have advanced deeply, it is ‘heavy terrain.’
          “If you have penetrated only shallowly, it is ‘light terrain. ’
          “If you have strongholds behind you and constrictions before
        you, it is ‘encircled terrain.’

          “If there is no place to go, it is ‘fatal terrain.’201
          “For this reason on dispersive terrain I unify their will.
          “On light terrain I have them group together.

          “On contentious terrain I race our rear elements forward. 202

          “On traversable terrain I focus on defense.203

          “On focal terrain I solidify our alliances.204
          “On heavy terrain I ensure a continuous supply of provisions.
        205
          “On entrapping terrain I [speedily] advance along the roads.

          “On encircled terrain I obstruct any openings.206
          “On fatal terrain I show them that we will not live.
  •••

   “Thus it is the nature of the army to defend when encircled; 207 to
fight fervently when unavoidable; and to follow orders when compelled
[by circumstances].
  •••
   “For this reason one who does not know the plans of the feudal lords
cannot forge preparatory alliances. One who does not know the
topography of mountains and forests, ravines and defiles, wetlands and
marshes cannot maneuver the army. One who does not employ local
guides will not secure advantages of terrain. One who does not know one
of these four or five cannot [command] the army of a hegemon or a true
king.208
  •••
   “Now when the army of a hegemon or true king attacks a great state,
their masses are unable to assemble. When it applies its awesomeness to
the enemy, their alliances cannot be sustained. For this reason it does not
contend with any alliances under Heaven.209 It does not nurture the
authority (ch’üan) of others under Heaven. Have faith in yourself, apply
your awesomeness to the enemy. Then his cities can be taken, his state
can be subjugated.210
  •••
   “Bestow rewards not required by law, impose exceptional
governmental orders. Direct the masses of the Three Armies as though
commanding one man. Press affairs upon them, do not explain the
purpose to them. Compel them with [prospects for] profit, but do not
inform them about the [potential] harm.
  •••
   “Cast them into hopeless situations and they will be preserved; have
them penetrate fatal terrain and they will live. Only after the masses have
penetrated dangerous [terrain] will they be able to craft victory out of
defeat.
  •••
   “The prosecution of military affairs lies in according with and
[learning] in detail the enemy’s intentions.211 If one then focuses [his
strength] toward the enemy, strikes a thousand li away, and kills their
general, it is termed ‘being skillful and capable in completing military
affairs.’
  •••
   “For this reason on the day the government mobilizes the army close
the passes, destroy all tallies, and do not allow their emissaries to pass
through. Hold intense strategic discussions 212 in the upper hall of the
temple in order to bring about the execution of affairs.
  •••
  “If the enemy opens the door, you must race in.
  •••
  “[Attack] what they love first. Do not fix any time for battle, assess
and react to the enemy in order to determine the strategy for battle.
  •••
  “For this reason at first be like a virgin [at home]; later—when the
enemy opens the door—be like a fleeing rabbit. The enemy will be
unable to withstand you.”
         12


Incendiary213 Attacks
Sun-tzu said:


   “There are five types of incendiary attack: The first is to incinerate
men, the second to incinerate provisions, the third to incinerate supply
trains, the fourth to incinerate armories, and the fifth to incinerate
formations.214
  •••
   “Implementing an incendiary attack depends on the proper conditions.
Equipment for incendiary attack should be fully prepared before
required. Launching an incendiary attack has its appropriate seasons,
igniting the fire the proper days. As for the seasons, it is the time of the
dry spell; as for the day, when the moon is in chi, pi, i, or chen. When it
is in these four lunar lodges, these are days the wind will arise.
  •••
  “In general, in incendiary warfare you must respond to the five
changes of fire:
          “If fires are started within [their camp], then you should
        immediately respond [with an attack] from outside.
          “If fires are ignited but their army remains quiet, then wait; do
        not attack.
           “When they flare into a conflagration, if you can follow up,
        then do so; if you cannot, then desist.
           “If the attack can be launched from outside without relying on
        inside [assistance], initiate it at an appropriate time.
          “If fires are ignited upwind, do not attack downwind.
  •••
  “Winds that arise in the daytime will persist; those that arise at night
will stop.
  •••
  “Now the army must know the five changes of fire in order to defend
against them at the astrologically appropriate times. Thus using fire to
aid an attack is enlightened, using water to assist an attack is powerful.
Water can be used to sever, but cannot be employed to seize.215
  •••
    “Now if someone is victorious in battle and succeeds in attack but
does not exploit the achievement, it is disastrous, and his fate should be
termed ‘wasteful and tarrying.’ Thus it is said the wise general ponders
it, the good general cultivates it.
  •••
   “If it is not advantageous, do not move. If objectives cannot be
attained, do not employ the army. Unless endangered do not engage in
warfare. The ruler cannot mobilize the army out of personal anger. The
general cannot engage in battle because of personal frustration. When it
is advantageous, move; when not advantageous, stop. Anger can revert
to happiness, annoyance can revert to joy, but a vanquished state cannot
be revived, the dead cannot be brought back to life.
   “Thus the unenlightened ruler is cautious about it, the good general
respectful of it. This is the Tao for bringing security to the state and
preserving the army intact.”
                        13


                Employing Spies 216


Sun-tzu said:
  “When you send forth an army of a hundred thousand on a campaign,
marching them out a thousand li, the expenditures of the common people
and the contributions of the feudal house will be one thousand pieces of
gold per day.217 Those inconvenienced and troubled both within and
without the border, who are exhausted on the road or unable to pursue
their agricultural work, will be seven hundred thousand families.
   “Armies remain locked in a standoff for years to fight for victory on a
single day, yet [generals] begrudge bestowing ranks and emoluments of
one hundred pieces of gold and therefore do not know the enemy’s
situation.218 This is the ultimate inhumanity. Such a person is not a
general for the people, an assistant for a ruler, or the arbiter of victory.
  •••
  “The means by which enlightened rulers and sagacious generals
moved and conquered others, that their achievements surpassed the
masses, was advance knowledge.
   “Advance knowledge cannot be gained from ghosts and spirits,
inferred from phenomena, or projected from the measures of Heaven, but
must be gained from men for it is the knowledge of the enemy’s true
situation.
  •••
   “Thus there are five types of spies to be employed: local spy, internal
spy, turned spy [double agent], dead [expendable] spy, and the living spy.
When all five are employed together and no one knows their Tao, this is
termed “spiritual methodology.” They are a ruler’s treasures.
          “Local spies—employ people from the local district.
          “Internal spies—employ their people who hold government
        positions.
          “Double agents—employ the enemy’s spies.
           “Expendable spies—are employed to spread disinformation
        outside the state. Provide our [expendable] spies [with false
        information] and have them leak it to enemy agents.219
          “Living spies—return with their reports.

   “Thus of all the Three Armies’ affairs220 no relationship is closer
than with spies; no rewards are more generous than those given to spies,
no affairs are more secret than those pertaining to spies.
  •••
   “Unless someone has the wisdom of a Sage, he cannot use spies;
unless he is benevolent and righteous, he cannot employ spies; unless he
is subtle and perspicacious, he cannot perceive the substance in
intelligence reports. It is subtle, subtle! There are no areas in which one
does not employ spies.
  •••
  “If before the mission has begun it has already been exposed, the spy
and those he informed should all be put to death.
  •••
   “In general, as for the armies you want to strike, the cities you want to
attack, and the men you want to assassinate, you must first know the
names of the defensive commander, his assistants, staff, door guards, and
attendants. You must have our spies search out and learn them all.
  •••
   “You must search for enemy agents who have come to spy on us.
Tempt them with profits, instruct and retain them. Thus double agents
can be obtained and employed. Through knowledge gained from them,
you can recruit both local and internal spies. Through knowledge gained
from them, the expendable spy can spread his falsehoods, can be used to
misinform the enemy. Through knowledge gained from them, our living
spies can be employed as times require.
  “The ruler must know these five aspects of espionage work. This
knowledge inevitably depends on turned spies; therefore, you must be
generous to double agents.
  •••
   “In antiquity, when the Yin arose, they had I Chih in the Hsia. When
the Chou arose, they had Lü Ya [the T’ai Kung] in the Yin.221 Thus
enlightened rulers and sagacious generals who are able to get intelligent
spies will invariably attain great achievements. This is the essence of the
military, what the Three Armies rely on to move.”
                  Tomb Texts and Lost Writings


A NUMBER of works preserve fragments and even passages that
apparently derive from the Art of War or are otherwise identified with
Sun-tzu’s thought. Whether they were deliberately excised; simply
dropped out of the text at an early date; constitute supplementary
materials originating with Sun-tzu after he composed the thirteen section
Art of War to capture King Ho-lü’s interest; or are simply subsequent
expansions by members of his school remains heavily debated. Much of
the material is redundant or so brief as to be unimportant. However, the
T’ung tien contains thirteen highly relevant passages on configurations
of terrain with correlated battle tactics. Although they strongly resemble
those found in the Wu-tzu and especially the Six Secret Teachings, they
may have originally been formulated by Sun-tzu himself. However, their
question and reply format implies a composition date subsequent to that
for the Art of War. While claims that they record actual questions posed
by the king cannot be summarily dismissed, frequent references to the
cavalry forces that would not appear for generations require later
revisions. Probably these passages stem from Sun-tzu’s school of
thought, being formulated by distant students and simply projected back
into history. Issues similar to those raised by the question of Sun-tzu’s
existence and the authenticity of the Art of War equally plague these
“lost materials” and the newly recovered tomb writings.
   The most important and coherent passages from among the recovered
bamboo slips and the T’ung tien are translated here: the first, termed
“Nine Configurations,” restates material from chapters eight (“Nine
Changes”), ten “Configurations of Terrain”), and eleven (“Nine
Terrains”). It is followed by the recovered bamboo strip version called
“Four Changes” since the latter is generally thought to belong to “Nine
Terrains.” Two supplementary passages we entitled “Two Questions”
from the T’ung tien continue the thread, and the section concludes with
the tomb text called the “King of Wu’s Questions.” While several
additional bamboo texts have been recovered from the Lin-i and other
tombs, they are less immediately accessible and relevant to the study of
Sun-tzu’s thought, and are left to appropriately annotated articles.


                       Nine Configurations1


                  (Passages from the T’ung tien)

  The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “On ‘dispersive terrain,’ the officers
and troops are thinking of their families.2 As we cannot engage in battle
with them, we must solidly defend our positions and not go forth. If the
enemy attacks our small cities; plunders our fields; prevents us from
gathering firewood; blocks our major roads; and awaits our emptiness
and depletion to urgently advance and attack, what should we do?”
   Sun Wu replied: “When the enemy has deeply penetrated our capital
region, putting numerous fortifications and cities behind them, their
officers and men regard the army as their family, are focused in their
intentions, and lightly enter into battle.3 [On the contrary] our troops are
in their native state; they feel secure on their territory and embrace life.
Therefore in battle formation they are not firm, when they engage in
battle they are not victorious. We should assemble the people and gather
the masses; collect the foodstuffs, livestock, and cloth; defend the walled
cities and prepare [to defend] the passes; and dispatch light troops to
sever their supply routes. If they are not able to provoke us into battle;
their provisions fail to arrive; and there’s nothing in the countryside that
they can plunder, their Three Armies will be in difficulty.4 Take
advantage of the situation to entice them, and then we can be successful.
   If we want to engage in battle in the countryside we must rely upon
the strategic configuration of power. Utilize ravines to establish
ambushes.5 Lacking ravines, we must conceal ourselves in the weather,
darkness, dusk, and fog, going forth where they will not expect it,
suddenly striking their indolent forces. Then we will achieve results.”
   The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “Suppose we have reached ‘light
terrain’ and have just entered the enemy’s borders.6 Our officers and
men are thinking of turning back. It’s hard to advance, but easy to
withdraw. We do not yet have ravines and defiles behind us, and the
Three Armies are fearful. The commanding general wants to advance,
the officers and troops want to retreat, so above and below are of
different minds. The enemy is defending his walled cities and
fortifications, putting his chariots and cavalry in good order. Some
occupy positions to our fore, others strike our rear. What should we do?”
   Sun Wu replied: “When we have reached ‘light terrain’ the officers
and men are not yet focused because their task is entering the border, not
waging battle. Do not approach his famous cities nor traverse his major
roads. Feign doubt, pretend confusion. Show him that we are about to
depart. Then initially select elite cavalry to silently enter their territory
and plunder their cattle, horses, and other domestic animals. When the
Three Armies observe that they were able to advance they will not be
afraid. Divide our superior soldiers and have them secretly prepare
ambushes. Should the enemy come up, strike without hesitation; if they
do not come up, then abandon the ambushes and depart.”
   He also said “Suppose the army has entered the enemy’s borders. The
enemy solidifies his fortifications without engaging in battle. Our
officers and troops are thinking of returning home, but [even] if we want
to retreat it would also be difficult. 7 This is referred to as ‘light terrain.’
We should select elite cavalry to establish ambushes on the strategic
roads. When we withdraw the enemy will pursue us; when they come up,
strike them.”

  The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “On ‘contentious terrain’ suppose the
enemy arrives first, occupies the strategic positions and holds the
advantageous ones with selected troops and well-trained soldiers.8 Some
of them go forth, others assume defensive positions, thereby being
prepared against our unorthodox tactics. What should we do?”
   Sun Wu replied: “The rule for fighting on ‘contentious terrain’ is that
one who yields will gain, while one who fights will lose. If the enemy
has gained a position, then be careful not to attack it. Draw him away by
pretending to go off. Set up flags, beat the drums, and move swiftly
toward what he loves. Drag wood to raise clouds of dust, befuddle his
ears and eyes. Divide up our superior troops, secretly placing them in
ambush. The enemy will certainly come forth to rescue [the endangered
target]. What others want we will give them; what they abandon we will
take. That is the Way (Tao) to fight for land [they occupy] first.
   If we arrive first and the enemy uses this strategy, then select fierce
troops to solidly defend our position. Have our light troops pursue [the
enemy’s feigned departure], splitting some off to set up ambushes in the
ravines and defiles. If the enemy turns about to fight, the troops in
ambush on the flanks should rise up. This is the Way (Tao) to achieve
complete victory.”

  The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “If on ‘traversable terrain’ where
movement is easy we are about to isolate the enemy and we want to
ensure he cannot advance, we must order our cities along the border to
improve their defensive preparations, thoroughly sever all open roads,
and secure the blockades at the passes.9 Suppose we have not planned
for it beforehand, while the enemy has already made such preparations.
They will be able to advance, but we will not be able to go forth. If our
numbers are moreover equal, what then?”
   Sun Wu replied: “Since we cannot go forth but they can come up, we
should split off some troops and conceal them. Our defenders should
appear at ease and lax. Display incapability, and the enemy will
definitely arrive. Establish ambushes, conceal ourselves in the grass, and
go forth where he doesn’t expect it. Then we can be successful.”

   The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “On ‘focal terrain’ one values being
first. If the road is far and we mobilize after the enemy, even though we
race our chariots and gallop our horses we will not be able to arrive first.
What then?”
   Sun Wu replied: “[Focal terrain is] territory bordered by three states
with roads open in the four directions. If we and the enemy oppose each
other, while on the side there are other states, then one who would be
referred to as ‘first’ must dispatch polite emissaries with generous gifts,
to make alliances with the neighboring states. Establish friendly relations
with them and secure their favor. Then even though our troops arrive
after the enemy, the masses [of the region] will already be allied with us.
With picked soldiers and well-trained troops they will block the
advantageous positions and occupy them. They will sustain our military
affairs and make our provisions substantial. Order our chariots and
cavalry to go in and out with an attitude of respectful anticipation. We
will have the support of the masses, while the enemy will have lost its
partisans. The armies of the feudal states, like the horns of an ox,10
thundering the drums will attack en masse. The enemy will be startled
and terrified, and no one will know what they ought to do.”

   The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “Suppose we have led the troops deep
into ‘heavy terrain,’ bypassing a great many places so our supply routes
are cut off or blocked.11 Suppose we want to return home but can not get
past their strategic configuration of power. If we want to forage on the
enemy’s land and maintain our troops without loss, then what should we
do?”
  Sun Wu replied; “Whenever we remain on heavy terrain the officers
and troops will readily be courageous. If the supply routes are no longer
open, then we must plunder to extend our provisions. Whatever the
lower ranks obtain in grain or cloth must all be forwarded to the top, and
those that collect the most will be rewarded. The warriors will [no
longer] think about returning home.
  If you want to turn about and go forth, urgently make defensive
preparations. Deepen the moats and raise the ramparts, showing the
enemy our determination to remain indefinitely. The enemy will suspect
we have an open route somewhere, and will remove themselves from the
critical roads. Then we can order our light chariots to sally forth silently,
the dust flying up, using the cattle and horses as bait. If the enemy goes
forth, beat the drums and follow him. [Prior to this] secretly conceal
some warriors in ambush, setting the time with them so that our forces
within and without can launch a coordinated attack. The enemy’s defeat
can then be known.”

   The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “Suppose we enter ‘entrapping
terrain’—mountains, rivers, ravines, and defiles.12 The road is difficult
to follow; we have been on the move for a long time and the troops are
tired. The enemy lies before us, and is ambushing our rear. His
encampment occupies a position to the left, while they defend against
our right. 13 His superior chariots and skilled cavalry are pressing us on
a constricted road. What then?”
   Sun Wu replied: “First have the light chariots advance about ten li so
that they and the enemy are observing each other. When our [main army]
has reached their ravines and defiles, deploy some to go to the left,
others to the right, while the commanding general conducts observations
in all directions. Select vacuities and seize them, then have all our forces
converge together on the road, stopping only when tired.”

   The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “Suppose we have entered ‘encircled
terrain,’ so that before us there is a strong enemy, and to our rear
precipitous and difficult ground.14 The enemy has severed our supply
lines, and is taking advantage of our moving disposition. If they beat
their drums and yell but do not advance—in order to observe our
capability—what should we do?”
   Sun-Wu replied: “On ‘encircled terrain’ it is appropriate to block up
all the openings, showing the troops that there is no place to go. Then
they will regard the army as their family; the multitude will be of one
mind; and the strength of the Three Armies will be united. Furthermore,
steam food for several days, not displaying any fire or smoke, thus
creating the appearance of decay, confusion, paucity of numbers, and
weakness.15 When the enemy sees us their battle preparations will
certainly be light.
   Exhort and incite our officers and troops, cause their anger to be
aroused. Assume formation, deploying our superior troops in ambush in
the ravines and defiles to the left and right. Beat the drums and go forth.
If the enemy opposes us, fervently strike them, concentrating on
breaking through. Fight in the front, consolidate in the rear, and set our
flanks out to the left and right.”
   [The king of Wu] again asked: “Suppose the enemy is surrounded by
our forces. They lie in ambush and make deep plans. They display
enticements to us, they tire us with their pennants, moving all about as if
in confusion. We do not know how to deal with this. What should we
do?”
   Sun Wu replied: “Have a thousand men take up pennants, divide up,
and block off the strategic roads. Have our light troops advance and try
to provoke the enemy. Deploy our battle arrays but do not press them.
Intercept them, but do not go off. This is the art of defeating stratagems.”

  The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “Suppose our army has gone out
beyond the borders, and our forces are arrayed in front of the enemy. The
enemy’s forces arrive in great number, encircling us several layers deep.
We want to suddenly burst out but all four sides are blocked. 16 If we
want to encourage our officers and incite our masses of troops, have
them risk their lives and crush the encirclement, then how should we do
it?”
   Sun Wu replied: “Make the moats deeper and the ramparts higher,
showing that we are making preparations to defend our position. Be quiet
and still, without moving, to conceal our capability. Announce orders to
the Three Armies to feign hopelessness. Kill your cattle and burn the
[supply] wagons to feast our warriors. Completely burn all provisions,
fill in the wells, level the stoves, cut off your hair, cast aside your caps,
completely eliminate all thoughts of life, have no further plans. 17 When
the officers are determined to die, then have them polish their armor and
sharpen their blades. When their ch’i has been united and their strength
as one, some should attack the two flanks, thundering the drums and
yelling fervently. The enemy will also become frightened, and no one
will know how to withstand us. Elite troops and detached units should
urgently attack their rear. This is the Way (Tao) by which to lose the road
and seek life. Thus it is said that ‘one who is in difficulty but doesn’t
make plans is impoverished; one who is impoverished and doesn’t fight
is lost.’ ”
   The king of Wu also asked: “What if we surround the enemy?”
   Sun Wu replied: “Mountain peaks and valley confines that are difficult
to traverse are referred to as the ‘[means to] impoverish invaders.’18 The
method for attacking them is to set our troops in ambush in dark and
concealed places. Open a road for [the enemy] to depart, show them a
path for flight.19 When they are seeking life and escaping [from death]
they certainly won’t have any will to fight. Then we can strike them;
even if they are numerous they will certainly be destroyed.”

   The Art of War also states: “If the enemy is on ‘fatal terrain,’ the ch’i
of his officers and troops will be courageous. If we want to strike him the
strategy is to [seemingly] accord with him and not resist. Secretly guard
against his advantageous positions. Sever his supply routes. If you are
afraid that he has unorthodox troops concealed that have not been
observed, have our bowmen and crossbowmen guard against his
positions.”


                           Four Changes20


                              (Tomb Text)

   [... . . There are roads that are not followed; there are armies that are
not attacked]; there are fortified cities that are not assaulted; there is
terrain for which one does not contend; there are orders21 from the ruler
[which are not implemented 22].
   As for the roads that are not followed: when we enter [enemy
territory] shallowly, then affairs to the fore will not be known. When we
enter deeply, then advantages to the rear can not be consolidated. If we
move then it will not be advantageous; if we remain still then we will be
imprisoned. In such cases do not follow them.
   As for armies that are not attacked: our two armies have intercepted
each other and encamped. We estimate23 that our strength is sufficient to
destroy their army and capture their general. [However], if we estimate it
from a long-range perspective, there are [those who excel in] unorthodox
strategic power and skillful tactics among them, and the army . . . . .
general. In such cases, even though the army can be attacked, do not
attack it.
   As for fortified cities that are not assaulted: We estimate that our
strength is sufficient to seize it. If we seize it, it will not be of any
advantage to the fore; if we gain it we will not be able to protect it at the
rear.24 If our strength [equals?] theirs, the city certainly will not be
taken. If, when we gain the advantages of a forward (position) the city
will then surrender by itself, while if we do not gain such advantages (the
city) will not cause harm to the rear—in such cases, even though the city
can be assaulted, do not assault it.
   As for terrain that is not contested: in mountain valleys where the
water [flow?] is unable to sustain life25 . . . . . empty . . . . . In such cases
do not contend for it.
    As for orders of the ruler which are not implemented: if the ruler’s
orders are contrary to these “four changes,” then do not implement them
. . . . . Implement . . . . . Affairs . . . . . changes, then he knows how to
employ the military.


                              Two Questions


             (Passages Preserved in the T’ung-tien)26

   The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “The enemy is courageous and
unafraid, arrogant and reckless. His soldiers are numerous and strong.
What should we do?”
   Sun Wu said: “Speak and act submissively in order to accord with
their intentions.27 Do not cause them to comprehend [the situation], and
thereby increase their indolence. In accord with the enemy’s shifts and
changes, submerge [our forces] in ambush to await [the moment]. Then
do not look at their forward motion, nor look back to their rearward
movement, but strike them in the middle. Even though they are
numerous, they can be taken. The Tao for attacking the arrogant is to not
engage their advance front.”

 The king of Wu asked Sun Wu: “The enemy is securely holding the
mountains and ravines, occupying all the advantageous positions.28
Their provisions are also sufficient. [Even though] we challenge them
they do not come forth. They take advantage of cracks [in our defenses]
to raid and plunder. What should we do?”
   Sun Wu said: “Segment and deploy our forces to defend the strategic
points; exercise vigilance in preparations, do not be indolent. Deeply
investigate their true situation, secretly await their laxity. Entice them
with profit, prevent them from gathering firewood. When they have not
gained anything in a long time, they will inevitably change by
themselves. Wait until they leave their strongholds; seize what they love.
[Even though] the enemy forcibly occupies precipitous passes, we will
still be able to destroy them.”


                      King of Wu’s Questions


                            (Tomb Text)29

  The king of Wu asked Sun-tzu: “When the six generals30 divide up
and occupy Chin’s territory, who will perish first? Who will be solid and
successful?”
  Sun-tzu said: “The Fan and Chung-hang clans31 will be the first to
perish.”
   “Who will be next?”
   “The Chih clan will be next.”
   “Who will be next?”
   “The Han and Wei will be next. The Chao have not lost their ancient
laws, so the state of Chin will revert to them.”
   The king of Wu asked: “May I hear the explanation?”
   Sun-tzu said: “Yes. The Fan and Chung-hang clans, in regulating their
fields, take eighty paces as the length and one hundred sixty paces as the
breadth,32 and impose taxes of one fifth [of the produce] on them. The
fields [under administration] 33 are narrow, the warriors attached [to the
fields] numerous. [Because] they impose a tax of one-fifth, the ducal
house is rich. The ducal house is rich, the attached warriors are
numerous. The ruler is arrogant, the ministers extravagant. They hope for
achievement and frequently engage in warfare. Thus I say they will
perish first.
   “[The Chih, in regulating their fields, take ninety paces as the length
and one hundred eighty paces as the breadth, and impose taxes of one
fifth on them. The fields under administration are narrow, the attached
warriors numerous. Because they impose a tax of one-fifth, the ducal
house is rich.]34 The ducal house is rich, the attached warriors
numerous. The ruler is arrogant, the ministers extravagant. They hope for
achievement and frequently engage in warfare. Thus the Chih will be
next after the Fan and Chung-hang.
   “The Han and Wei, in regulating their fields, take a hundred paces for
the length and two hundred paces for the breadth, and impose taxes of
one fifth on them. The lands under administration are narrow, the
attached warriors are numerous. Taxing them at one fifth, the ducal
house is rich. The ruler is arrogant, the ministers extravagant. They hope
for achievement and frequently engage in warfare. Thus I say Han and
Wei will be next after the Chih.
   “The Chao, in regulating their fields, take a hundred and twenty paces
for the length and two hundred forty paces for the breadth. The duke
does not impose any taxes on them.35 The ducal house is poor, their
attached warriors few. The ruler is frugal, the ministers [respectful] and
they thereby govern a rich populace. Thus I say it is a solid state. The
state of Chin will revert to them.”
   The king of Wu said: “Excellent.” The Tao of the true king . . . [must
be] to generously love his people.”
        Notes to the General Introduction and Historical
                          Background


Abbreviations Used in the Notes
(See also the lists at the beginning of the notes of The Art of War
translation.)


 AA          Acta Asiatica

 AM          Asia Major

 BIHP        Bulletin of the Institute of History and Philology

 BMFEA       Bulletin of the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities

 BSOAS       Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies

 CC          Chinese Culture

 CCCY        Chin-chu chin-i editions

 EC          Early China

 GSR         Grammata Serica Recensa (Bernhard Karlgren, BMFEA
             29 [1957])

 HJAS        Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies

 JAOS        Journal of the American Oriental Society

 JAS         Journal of Asian Studies

 JCP         Journal of Chinese Philosophy

 JNCBRAS     Journal of the North Central Branch, Royal Asiatic
             Society

 JRAS        Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
 KK           K’ao-ku Hsüeh-pao

 MS           Monumenta Serica

 PEW          Philosophy East and West

 TP           T’oung Pao

 WW           Wen-wu

 LTCC         Liu-t’ao chih-chieh, in Ming-pen Wu-ching Ch’i-shu
 WCCS         chih-chieh, vol. 2 (Shih-ti chiao-yü ch’u-pan-she, Taipei,
              1972).

 LT CS        K’ung Te-ch’i, Liu-t’ao ch’ien-shuo (Chieh-fang-chün
              ch’u-pan- she, Peking, 1987).

 TKLT         Hsü Pei-ken, T’ai Kung Liu-t’ao chin-chu chin-i (Shang-
 CCCY         wu yin- shu-kuan, Taipei, 1976).

 TKLT         Tai Kung Liu-t’ao, in Ch’ung-k’an Wu-ching hul-chieh
 WCHC         (Chung-chou Ku-chi ch’u-pan-she, Cheng-chou, 1989).


References to various volumes in the Seven Military Classics are to our
Westview translation: Ralph D. and Mei-chün Sawyer, The Seven
Military Classics of Ancient China, Westview Press, Boulder, 1993.
Titles are abbreviated as follows:


 Art of War         Sun-tzu’s Art of War

 Ssu-ma Fa          The Methods of the Ssu-ma

 Questions and      Questions and Replies between T’ang T’ai-tsung
 Replies            and Li Wei-kung

 Three Strategies   Three Strategies of Huang Shih-kung

 Six Secret         T’ai Kung’s Six Secret Teachings
 Teachings
1 The Confucius (551-479 B.C.) of the Analects demands courage and
resoluteness in the practice of righteousness and requires that his
disciples always do what is appropriate. He cultivated the six arts, which
included chariot driving and archery, and in other texts refers to the
terrible visage of the righteous man when he dons his armor. He also
indicated that the chün-tzu, or perfected man, does not compete, which
was taken by later Confucians as evidence that conflict and warfare are
inappropriate for civilized men. Other early Confucians, such as Mencius
(371-289 B.C.) and Hsün-tzu (a Confucian of the late Warring States
period who wrote extensively on military affairs), were cognizant of the
inescapable necessity of wars and armies. Only after several centuries, as
the Confucians became further removed from the pristine spirit of their
founder and the realities of the early context, did the tendency toward
pacificism, or (perhaps more correctly) the civil, emerge and gain
ascendancy. This is a complex topic that requires an extensive separate
analytic work.
2 The dates assigned to the Spring and Autumn and the Warring States
periods vary somewhat depending on the writer’s predelictions. The
Ch’un ch’iu, or Spring and Autumn Annals, which chronicles events
from 722 to 481 B.C., was traditionally held to have been edited
didactically by Confucius and was one of the essential Five Classics.
(Confucius no doubt used the work for educational purposes and may
have emended it to some extent, but he cannot be considered the
compiler or editor in any real sense.) The Tso chuan, purportedly a
commentary to the Spring and Autumn Annals but in actuality a self-
existent work that portrays the period in considerable detail, covers the
years 722 to 468 B.C. (or 464 B.C.; opinion seems to vary). The
Intrigues of the Warring States contains some material from the early
fifth century B.C., but it basically records the people and events of the
period 403-221 B.C., when the Ch’in officially assumed the mantle of
imperial rule. Thus the Spring and Autumn period should refer to 722-
481 B.C. and the Warring States era to 403-221 B.C., traditional dates
that are adopted herein. However, there is also considerable logic to
dating the Spring and Autumn period from the movement of the Western
Chou capital to the east in 771 B.C. and extending the Warring States
period to cover the interval between the end of the Tso chuan material
and 403 B.C. This gives dates such as those Herrlee G. Creel adopts in
The Origins of Statecraft in China (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1970, p. 47): 770-464 and 463-222 B.C.
3 Lord Shang (died 338 B.C.), although much reviled by Confucian
tradition, had great impact in reforming the laws and institutions of the
state of Ch’in. Among his important contributions were imposing
stringent laws; advocating and implementing a severe but certain system
of rewards and punishments; restricting the conferring of rank to military
achievements; organizing the entire populace as well as the military into
groups of five and ten, thereby creating a dual-purpose, mutual guarantee
system that facilitated immediate conscription; and eliminating the
boundary paths between fields, making land a salable commodity. (Some
of these reforms may have had antecedents, including those involving
the military. For example, see Fu Shao-chieh, Wu-tzu chin-chu chin-i,
Shang-wu yin-shu-kuan, Taipei, 1976, p. 17.) The remnants of Lord
Shang’s book have been translated by J. J. L. Duyvendak as The Book of
Lord Shang (Arthur Probsthain, London, 1928; reprint, University of
Chicago Press, 1963).
4 Han Fei-tzu (died 233 B.C.), a famous Legalist and former disciple of
Hsün-tzu (298-238 B.C.), left an extensive treatise which has been
translated in full by W. K. Liao (The Complete Works of Han Fei-tzu, 2
vols., Arthur Probsthain, London, 1959 [reprint of 1939 edition]), and as
selections by Burton Watson (Han Fei-tzu; Basic Writings, Columbia
University Press, New York, 1964.)
5 “Virtue,” although encompassing the basic meaning of moral virtue,
was the object of much complex thought in ancient China and came to
have numerous nuances and technical meanings, including “power” and
“potency.” Some of these are discussed briefly in the footnotes to the
translations. In general, “Virtue” (capitalized) is used to translate the
term te whenever the transcendent dimensions are critical—when the
cultivation of te (virtue) leads to Virtue, which is synonymous with
moral achievement and the inner power that accompanies it. Within the
context of Taoist texts and to a certain extent military writings influenced
by them, the term te indicates inner potency or power—generally as
contrasted with and distinguished from the moral and ethical realm
because the artificial constraints of rites, morals, and ethics were
anathema to most Taoist-oriented thinkers (neo-Taoism and eclectic
works excepted). A specialized body of literature has developed in recent
years, due partly to the discovery of previously unknown manuscripts;
these writings offer various conceptualizations and systematizations
under the rubric of “Huang-Lao” thought, although there is by no means
universal accord that these trends constitute a school or an affiliation.
Specialists are no doubt aware of them, but the general reader may find
Arthur Waley’s classic comments on the term te in his introduction to
The Way and Its Power (Grove Press, New York, 1958), or D. C. Lau’s
thoughts in his translation of the Tao Te Ching (Chinese University Press,
Hong Kong, 1982) of interest. Also see the notes to the introduction to
the Art of War for further discussion and sources, and Aat Vervoorn’s
article “Taoism, Legalism, and the Quest for Order in Warring States
China,” JCP 8 (September 1981): 303-24.
   Throughout we translate te as “virtue” when it refers to morals and
ethics and as “Virtue” when it connotes the attainment of a special status
—with inherent power—through the cultivation of virtue, which is not
unlike the original meaning of virtus. The questions of its transcendent
dimensions, relationship to potency, and metaphysical realization in
warfare command must be left to another book and the studies of
experts.
6 Every “civilized” dynasty, including the Shang, appears to have
exploited “barbarian”—defined by reference to the dynasty’s own self-
perceived level of civilization—peoples against other, similar peoples. In
many cases they were even settled in the frontier regions, just within
state borders, and shouldered the burden of dynastic defense. However,
this first appeared as an articulated policy in the Han era and was
symptomatic of the steppe-sedentary conflict. Discussions may be found
in Owen Lattimore, Inner Asian Frontiers of China (Beacon Press,
Boston, 1962); Yü Ying-shih, Trade and Expansion in Han China
(University of California Press, Berkeley, 1967); and Sechin Jagchid and
Van Jay Symons, Peace, War, and Trade Along the Great Wall (Indiana
University Press, Bloomington, 1989).
7 This discussion of the Shang is based on standard Western texts and
monographs, such as Kwang-chih Chang’s Shang Civilization (Yale
University Press, New Haven, 1980) and Cheng Te-k’un’s Shang China
(Heffer, Cambridge, 1960), supplemented by the normal range of articles
from specialist journals, such as Early China and Wen wu, and the
following classic works: Sun Lin, Hsia Shang shih-kao (Wen-wu ch’u-
pan-she, Peking, 1987), and Tuan Chen-mei, Yin-hsü k’aoku-shih
(Chung-chou ku-chi ch’u-pan-she, Honan, 1991). They are listed in the
bibliography under the sections for historical materials.
8 A major point of contention is whether slaves were used solely for
domestic work and perhaps occasional agricultural activities or whether
the entire Shang edifice was based on the systematic use and exploitation
of a slave class of agricultural workers. Depending on whether a Marxist
or another synthetic framework is employed, the evidence is defined and
interpreted differently. However, it appears that enslaved prisoners and
their descendants were found largely in domestic work rather than
agriculture.
9 In the Shang and Chou dynasties, the presence of the lineage’s
ancestral temple virtually constituted the defining feature of a capital
city. Naturally, various deities, spirits, and animistic forces were also
worshipped, depending on the period, state, and beliefs of the time. The
ruler’s ancestral temple always played a critical role in prewar
discussions and in prebattle ceremonies, as is evident in the Seven
Military Classics.
10 In the past decade a number of lengthy, minutely detailed articles
based on historical records, recently recovered bronze inscriptions,
calendrical reconstructions, and celestial phenomena have discussed the
probable date for Chou’s conquest of the Shang. The traditionally held
date of 1122 B.C. proposed by the Han dynasty scholar Liu Hsin has
been invalidated emphatically by David Pankenier’s proof that the rare
five-planet conjunction recorded in the Bamboo Annals actually occurred
on May 28, 1059 B.C. (See David W. Pankenier, “Astronomical Dates in
Shang and Western Zhou,” EC 7 [1981-82], pp. 2-5.) Various other dates
previously proposed—such as 1111, 1075 (T’ang Lan), 1027, 1025, and
1023 (Bernhard Karlgren)—have also been discarded. Current
arguments, based on essentially the same evidence—including the
critical five-planet conjunction—variously supplemented or interpreted,
produce three theories: Pankenier’s January 20, 1046 B.C. (Pankenier,
“Astronomical Dates,” pp. 2-37, in particular p. 16); David S. Nivison’s
January 15, 1045 B.C. (originally proposed in his article “The Dates of
Western Chou,” HJAS 43 [December 1983]: 481-580), and 1040
(according to his note revising the JAS article published almost
simultaneously in Early China [EC 8 (1982-83), pp. 76-78]); and
Edward Shaughnessy, who supports Nivison’s first date of January 15,
1045 (see “’New’ Evidence on the Zhou Conquest,” EC 6 [1980-81], pp.
57-79, and “The ‘Current’ Bamboo Annals and the Date of the Zhou
Conquest of Shang,” EC 11-12 [1985-87], pp. 33-60, especially p. 45).
Chou Fa-kao also supports the 1045 date in a Chinese review article
(“Wu Wang k’e Shang te nien-tai wen-t’i,” in Li-shih Yü-yen Yen-chiu-so
chi-k’an [BIHP] 56, no. 1 [1985], Taipei, pp. 5-41). Because 1045 B.C.
appears well-founded, it is adopted herein. However, for further
discussions, see Chang, Shang Civilization, pp. 15-19; Creel, The
Origins of Statecraft in China, pp. 487-91, who suggests accepting the
traditional date of 1122 B.C. even though acknowledging it may be
inaccurate; Tung Tso-pin, “Hsi-Chou nien-li-p’u,” BIHP 23 (1951), pp.
681-760; Ch’ü Wan-li, “Hsi-Chou shih-shih kai-shu,” BIHP 42 (1971),
pp. 775-802; Jung Men-yüan, “Shih-t’an Hsi-Chou chi-nien,” Chung-hua
wen-shih lun-ts’ung 1 (1980), pp. 16-20; Ho Yu-ch’i, “Chou Wu-wang
fa-Chou te nien-tai wen-t’i,” Chung-shan Ta-hsüeh hsüeh-pao 1 (1981),
pp. 64-70; and Edward L. Shaughnessy, “On the Authenticity of the
Bamboo Annals,” HJAS 46 (June 1986): 149-80.
11 The casting of massive ritual cauldrons, some weighing several
hundred pounds, and the production of bronze weapons required
hundreds of skilled artisans engaged in coordinated activity.
12 It is well-known that in the plains area of central China—the locus of
the Shang dynasty—the soft yellowish earth can easily be dug with a
sharpened wooden stick or other nonmetallic object. Naturally,
agricultural efficiency improves with metal plows and hoes, but they
were not essential and were rarely, if ever, used in the Shang era. (See
Chang, Shang Civilization, p. 223; Hsu and Linduff, Western Chou
Civilization, pp. 75 and 353; and T. R. Treger, A Geography of China.
[Aldine, Chicago, 1965], pp. 50-51.) A contrary view is taken by the
traditionalist Ch’en Liang-tso in a lengthy, detailed review of the
archaeological evidence. He concludes that the Shang already had bronze
agricultural implements, which were used concurrently with those made
of inexpensive materials such as stone and bone. Moreover, in his view,
these implements were employed extensively throughout the Chou
period until they were finally displaced by iron in the Warring States era.
(See Ch’en Liang-tso, “Wo-kuo ku-tai te ch’ing-t’ung nungchü,” Han-
hsüeh yen-chiu vol. 2, no. 1 [June 1984]: pp. 135-166; vol. 2, no. 2
[December 1984]: 363-402.)
13 Rice, which requires wet cultivation, originated in the south and was
little grown in Shang central areas. For general discussions of agriculture
in China, see Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 6, part 2,
Agriculture, by Francesca Bray, (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1984); Kwang-chih Chang, ed., Food in Chinese Culture
(Yale University Press, New Haven, 1977); and E. N. Anderson, The
Food of China (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1988).
14 The enormous numbers of animals used in the almost continuous
sacrifices, which went to feed the priestly caste and the nobility, is cited
as evidence that cattle and other animals must have been raised. Cf.
Chang, Shang Civilization, pp. 142-45, 230.
15 See ibid., pp. 195-96. The king’s wives are also recorded as having
commanded troops and as having personal forces.
16 Cf. Cheng Te-k’un, Shang China, pp. 208-12; Chang, Shang
Civilization, p. 249. The total number in the army during wartime is
sometimes estimated at thirty thousand (Cheng, Shang China, p. 210),
which would be many measures smaller than the number of troops
reported as having engaged in the battle of Mu-yeh. This suggests that
the more limited figures apply only to the early to middle Shang era—
perhaps with significant expansion later—as well as overstatement.
17 See Fan Yuzhou, “Military Campaign Inscriptions from YH 127,”
BSOAS vol. 52, no. 3 (1989): pp. 533-48; and David N. Keightley, who
cites the extensive nature of the king’s travels in “The Late Shang State,”
in The Origins of Chinese Civilization (University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1983), pp. 552-55.
18 A later term, the Three Armies (san chün), was used constantly to
refer to a campaign army. Whether it originates with these three divisions
(san shih) or was simply an organizational creation (such as for upper,
middle, and lower) is not clear. (Cf. Chin Hsiang-heng, “Ts’ung chia-ku
pu-ts’u yen-chiu Yin Shang chün-lü-chung chih wang-tsu san-hsing san-
shih,” Chung-kuo wen-tzu 52 [1974], pp. 1-26; and the material on
military organization that concludes the introduction.)
19 A basic distinction in the Shang and Early Chou was made between
the people who dwelled within the kuo, the “state,” and those who lived
outside it. At this time a state was essentially a city fortified by
surrounding walls, with the privileged class residing within its protective
confines. The city dwellers furnished the warriors, whereas those outside
the walls were not required to serve or were merely conscripted as
menial support (if they were not alien peoples under the control of the
kuo). This distinction declined as the scope of warfare eventually
expanded in the Spring and Autumn period. (See, for example, Hsü Hsi-
ch’en, “Chou-tai ping-chih ch’u-lun,” Chung-kuo-shih yen-chiu 4 [1985],
pp. 4-5.)
20 On warfare objectives, see Yang Hung, Chung-kuo ku-ping-ch’i lun-
ts’ung, Ming-wen shu-chü, Taipei, 1983, p. 8. Although agriculturally
based and accordingly prosperous, the Shang ruling house required vast
riches to distribute to the nobility, whether directly or indirectly (through
allowing them to retain the plunders of war). Because the Shang domain
was extensive and the nobility counted in the tens of thousands of
families, it was rather voracious. For example, in one battle the Shang
reportedly took thirty thousand prisoners (see Chang, Shang Civilization
, p. 194).
21 Among the peoples particularly chosen for sacrifice were the Ch’iang,
from whose Chiang clan many of the principal wives of the Chou royalty
came. The T’ai Kung, adviser to Kings Wen and Wu of the Chou, was
also of Ch’iang origin. It seems possible that the Shang’s enmity toward
the Ch’iang drove them to an alliance with the Chou, although this is not
known. See E. G. Pulleyblank, “The Chinese and Their Neighbors in
Prehistoric and Early Historic Times,” in The Origins of Chinese
Civilization, pp. 420-21; Chang, Shang Civilization, p. 249.
22 In the Shang and probably the Early Chou, weapons were generally
stored in government armories and were distributed only when required
for military campaigns. (See Yen I-p’ing, “Yin Shang ping-chih,”
Chung-kuo wen-tzu, NS 7 [1983], p. 39.) This reflected the considerable
cost of weapons and diffused any threat of an armed political revolt
against the ruling family. Furthermore, because of the cost factor, some
researchers believe conscripted infantrymen were generally not furnished
with serious weapons until the infantry grew in significance and less
expensive iron weapons became available. For example, see Chung-kuo
chün-shih-shih Pien-hsieh-tsu, Chung-kuo chün-shih-shih, vol. 4; Ping-fa
(Chieh-fang-chün ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1988), p. 2.
23 The dagger-ax derives its name for the daggerlike blade horizontally
affixed near the top of a long wooden shaft, but it is primarily a hooking
weapon. Wounds are inflicted by swinging down and pulling forward,
with the curved knifelike blade cutting in and hooking the enemy (rather
than delivering a crushing, chopping blow directly into the soldier as an
ax blade would. The ancients also had axes, but their role seems to have
been limited and perhaps largely ceremonial.) See Chou Wei, Chung-kuo
ping-ch’i shih-kao (Ming-wen shu-chü, Taipei, 1980), pp. 64-88;
Hayashi Minao, Chūgoku In-shū jidai no buki (Kyoto Daigaku Jimbun
Kagaku Kenkyūsho, Kyoto, 1972), pp. 3-96; Lao Kan, “Chan-kuo shih-
tai te chan-cheng fang-fa,” BIHP 37 (1967): pp. 53-57; and Shih Chang-
ju, “Hsiao-t’un Yin-tai te ch’eng-t’ao ping-ch’i,” BIHP 22 (1950): pp.
59-65. A number of specialized articles have discussed this indigenous
weapon, including Ma Heng, “Ko chi chih yen-chiu,” Yenching hsüeh-
pao, no. 5 (1929): pp. 745-53; Kuo Pao-chün, “Ko chi yü-lun,” BIHP, 5,
no. 3 (1935): pp. 313-26; and Li Chi, “Yü-pei ch’u-t’u ch’ing-t’ung kou-
ping fen-lei t’u-chieh,” BIHP 22 (1950): pp. 1-31.
24 The spear was already extant in Shang times and no doubt dates back
to the neolithic period. Shang spears boasted bronze spearheads (as well
as those made of other materials, such as stone and bone), but with the
development of iron technology, iron tips appeared by the Warring States
period. In addition, the longer spears suited to use with the chariot (and
thus also employed by infantry) in the Shang and Early Chou tended to
be too unwieldy for infantrymen and consequently were shortened
somewhat in the Warring States period. Conversely, the blades tended to
become longer and sharper in the early Spring and Autumn period and
continued to undergo similar modifications thereafter. For detailed
discussions, in addition to references listed in the bibliography, see Chou
Wei, Chung-kuo ping-ch’i shih-kao, pp. 98-102; and Hiyashi Minao,
Chūgoku In-Shū jidai no buki, pp. 97-130.
25 The bow was already a major part of the Shang warrior’s arsenal and
was generally carried by the chariot commander. Composite bows
appeared early, increasing in complexity, size, and strength over the
centuries with improvements in bonding and crafting technology.
Various materials, including bamboo, were employed and were matched
for greatest composite strength under tension. In the Shang era wooden
shafted arrows generally mounted bronze points, although bone, stone,
and other materials were also employed. However, bronze continued to
prevail even after iron had generally appeared in the Warring States. For
an overview and detailed discussions, see Hiyashi Minao, Chūgoku In-
Shū jidai no buki, pp. 243-99 (on bows) and pp. 321-74 (on arrows);
Yoshida Mitsukuni (who also discusses cross-bows), “Yumi to ōyumi,”
Tōyōshi kenkyū 12, no. 3 (1953): pp. 82-92; and the classic report and
analysis of Shih Chang-ju, “Hsiao-t’un Yin-tai te ch’eng-t’ao ping-ch’i,”
pp. 25-44 (on the bow) and pp. 44-54 (on arrows).
26 See the last part of the introduction for an annotated discussion of the
development and history of armor in ancient China.
27 In recent years there have been a number of claims for widespread
use of bronze swords in the Early Chou, such as Hsu and Linduff,
Western Chou Civilization , p. 81. However, although the innovative
horizon for many weapons and technological achievements continues to
be pushed earlier and earlier with each new discovery, it would seem
these would best be termed daggers rather than swords, both in length
and function. See the last part of the introduction for an annotated
discussion of the sword’s history and some of the issues surrounding it.
28 “Chien-hsüan,” Lü-shih ch’un-ch’iu (CCCY edition, Shang-wu yin-
shu-kuan, Taipei, 1985), p. 204. Although claims that the Hsia had
chariots are generally discounted, such assertions continue to be made,
including in the recent PRC publication Chung-kuo chün-shih-shih, vol.
4 Ping-fa, p. 5.
29 See the last part of the introduction for an annotated discussion of the
introduction and history of the chariot in China.
30 See the discussion of military organization in the last part of the
introduction for further information and references.
31 The Ssu-ma Fa discusses the practice and objectives of holding such
hunts, and they are mentioned in a number of the other Seven Military
Classics as well as in the Tso chuan and the “Ta Ssu-ma” section of the
Chou li. (See the translator’s introduction and notes to the Ssu-ma Fa
translation for further information.) Also see Ping-fa, pp. 32-33; Yen I-
p’ing, “Yin Shang ping-chih,” p. 40; and Hsü Hsich’en, “Chou-tai ping-
chih ch’u-lun,” p. 10.
   The difficulty in attaining the required chariot skills and their expense
are cited by some historians as the critical factors that made the rise of
infantry units inevitable. Conscripts, whatever their class origin, simply
could not be trained in the time available. For example, see Yang K’uan,
“Ch’un-ch’iu Chan-kuo-chien feng-chien te chün-shih tsu-chih ho chan-
cheng te pien-hua,” Li-shih chiao-hsüeh 4 (1954), p. 12.
32 One tradition asserts that the Chou were descendants of the Hsia,
whereas modern scholars such as K. C. Chang postulate that the peoples
of the “Three Dynasties” were culturally and racially alike but politically
distinct. (See K. C. Chang, “Sandai Archaeology and the Formation of
States in Ancient China: Processual Aspects of the Origins of Chinese
Civilization,” in The Origins of Chinese Civilization , ed. David N.
Keightly, pp. 495-521; and Chang, Shang Civilization, pp. 348-55.)
33 The Chou’s “barbarian” origin was generally recognized in antiquity,
and the Shih chi explicitly records Tan Fu—the Chou progenitor—as
deliberately abandoning nomadic ways after his people resettled with
him in the south to avoid conflict with other barbarians. (See the “Chou
Annals.”)
34 King Chou of the Shang was persuaded by opulent bribes not only to
release the future King Wen from detainment but also to name him “Lord
of the West.” Under this title he was entrusted with responsibility for
defending Shang’s flank and thereby afforded an excellent pretext for
developing and exercising his own military powers.
35 It is generally thought that speed, mobility, and surprise marked the
Chou campaign, with the chariot playing a key role. However, there are
dissenting views, such as Hsu and Linduff (Western Chou Civilization, p.
88), who consider other factors more important, such as the effective
deployment of infantry, longer swords, and superior armor (see Hsu and
Linduff, p. 81).
36 According to the Shih chi, the Shang had a one-hundred-thousand-
man campaign army in the south, which could have amounted to a third
or more of their total available forces and perhaps included some of their
best units. King Chou of the Shang compounded his difficulties by
ignoring repeated warnings about the potential danger posed by the Chou
and notice of their actual advance. (Numbers from this period are
extremely unreliable and should only be understood as indicative of
comparative size.)
37 Because the antiquity of the Six Secret Teachings is almost
universally denied, it seems possible that this revolutionary impulse may
have been directed toward the imperial Ch’in by writers very late in the
Warring States period. Their hatred of the brutal Ch’in would account for
the ferocity of the policies, with such fervor being envisioned in the
heroes of the ancient Chou as they gambled everything to overturn the
vile despot. Whether the combatants observed any civilizing rites (such
as in the early Spring and Autumn period) in the centuries prior to the
battle at Mu-yeh is doubtful, but the traditional view assumes that they
did.
38 See Hsü Pei-ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-shih, pp. 291-93.
The Chou dynasty ruled in part through its avowed policy of cultural
acculturation, transforming the diverse people within its domain through
gradual assimilation while absorbing and integrating new characteristics
themselves. The concept of the Central States and the Hua-Hsia identity
arose with them, although the surviving states in the Warring States
period still retained distinctive regional personalities and characteristics.
For a general discussion, see Cho-yun Hsu and Katheryn M. Linduff,
Western Chou Civilization (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1988),
chapters 4-6.
39 Historical materials from the Chou period and thereafter, such as the
Shih chi, were clearly influenced by the effective propaganda efforts of
the Chou both prior and subsequent to the conquest. Their vile portrait of
the evil Shang ruler was amplified by later writers—especially the
Confucians—for didactic purposes, although not without an occasional
dissenting voice (for example, Tzu Kung, Analects XIX:20). This is not
to deny that the Shang oppressed the people or that King Chou of the
Shang was not a villain. Rather, it should simply be understood that the
Chou’s self-portrait depicting the cause of Virtue as naturally attracting
allies and politically dominating the realm was underpinned in actuality
by extensive military achievements and persuasive power.
40 The Shang’s triumph over King Chieh, the last evil ruler of the Hsia,
was traditionally portrayed in terms similar to those describing the
Chou’s conquest of the Shang, but much simplified. King T’ang—the
founder of the Shang dynasty—cultivated his Virtue, pursued benevolent
policies, and garnered his strength on the fringe of the Hsia empire until
finally engaging in a decisive battle. There was even a sagely counterpart
to the T’ai Kung, the famous minister I Yin, who may have created the
indirect striking tactics that proved successful for the Shang. (See Hsü
Pei-ken et al., Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, 18 vols. [Li-ming,
Taipei, 1976], revised edition, vol. 1, pp. 49-53, and also the early
chapters of the Shang shu [Book of Documents]. The Shang shu also
portrays Shang dynasty kings acting as strong supporters of virtue and as
punitive agents against the unrighteous.)
41 Although the parameters of the dynastic cycle postulate an essentially
continuous decline in the power of the imperial house, with allowances
for temporary resurgences, recently discovered historical materials
indicate that the Shang kings continued to be vigorous monarchs,
mounting military expeditions and conducting tours of inspection
throughout the years. Even though the last ruler—who is recorded as
having been enthroned for more than sixty years—considerably
debauched the image of the king, earlier kings, such as Wu Ting, were
both effective and powerful.
42 The archetypal seductress played an extensive but tragic role
throughout Chinese history, with several infamous examples bringing the
imperial house to ruin. Even the less famous seductresses were constant
sources of tension because the almighty emperors—despite having
numerous consorts, concubines, and other ladies in waiting—were easily
persuaded by their favorites to grant state favors and administrative or
military power to their own relatives, thereby weakening the imperial
house and creating sources of dissension. The displacement of an old
consort by a new beauty or the replacement of an heir also caused
interminable strife and intrigue.
43 Shih chi, “Shang Annals,” translated from Shih-chi chin-chu, vol. 1
(Shang-wu yin-shu-kuan, Taipei, 1979), p. 94.
44 Hou (ruler) Chi (millet) was one of the legendary deified figures
traditionally credited with creating China’s culture and civilization. He is
identified particularly with agricultural developments, such as the
domestication of wild grains, and is recorded in the “Chou Annals” as
having been appointed minister of agriculture by Emperor Shun.
45 “Chou Annals,” Shih-chi chin-chu, vol. 1, p. 101. It should be noted
that the Chou were already powerful before this confrontation with the
other barbarians; therefore, the traditional account is obviously highly
simplified.
46 Hsü Pei-ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-shih, pp. 274-75.
47 For further discussions of Shang-Chou relations, see Hsu and Linduff,
Western Chou Civilizaton, pp. 41-49; and Herrlee G. Creel, The Origins
of Statecraft in China (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970), pp.
57-69.
   King Wu Ting of the Shang is recorded as having conducted military
campaigns against the Chou before they descended to the Wei River
valley. Chi Li apparently acted on behalf of the Shang against
troublesome tribes from the northwest quarter before being perceived as
too great a threat himself. The fact that the Shang could command and
imprison both Chi Li and King Wen is testimony to their regional power
and the Chou’s continued submission, even though Shang rulers could
not completely control the outer quarters. Because both Chi Li and King
Wen were married to Shang princesses and members of the Shang
nobility also appear to have married women from the Chou royal house,
marriage relations were another aspect of their political policies.
48 His detention is variously said to have lasted anywhere from one to
six or seven years. During this period he reputedly devoted himself to
serious contemplation, ordering the sixty-four hexagrams of the I ching
and appending the Judgments—activities befitting a future cultural
legend. (The texts for the individual hexagram lines are attributed to the
duke of Chou, one of his sons, and Confucius is closely identified with
the book as well.) His reign, which began when he was fifty, is recorded
in the Shih chi as having lasted fifty-five years; he died nine years after
being released by the Shang. However, such great longevity (which he
apparently shared with the T’ai Kung and the evil King Chou) is
extremely problematic, particularly in an age in which people had short
life expectancies. For discussions of the Shang and Chou chronologies,
see, among others, David N. Keightley, “The Bamboo Annals and the
Shang-Chou Chronology,” HJAS, 38, no. 2 (1978): 423-38; Edward J.
Shaughnessy, “On the Authenticity of the Bamboo Annals,” HJAS 46,
no. 1 (1986): 149-80; Chou Fa-kao, “Chronology of the Western Chou
Dynasty,” Hsiang-kang Chung-wen Ta-hsüeh Chung-kuo Wen-hua Yen-
chiu-so hsüeh-pao 4, no. 1 (1971): 173-205; Ch’ü Wan-li, “Shih-chi Yin-
pen-chi chi ch’i-t’o chi-lu-chung so-tsai Yin-Shang shih-tai te shih-shih,”
Taiwan Ta-hsü wen-shih-che hsüeh-pao 14, no. 11 (1965): 87-118; Jung
Meng-yüan, “Shih-t’an Hsi-Chou chi-nien,” Chung-hua wen-shih lun-
ts’ung no. 1, (1980): 1-21; Ch’ü Wan-li, “Hsi-Chou shih-shih kai-shu,”
BIHP 42 (1971): 775-802; Tung Tso-pin, “Hsi-Chou nien-li-p’u,” BIHP
23 (1951): 681-760; and Ho Yu-ch’i, “Chou Wu-wang fa-Chou te nien-
tai wen-t’i,” Chung-shan Ta-hsüeh hsüeh-pao, no. 1, (1981); 64-70.
49 Several Chinese military historians have stressed the importance of
the location because it exposed them to constant military challenges. Not
only did the Chou train for and mount military campaigns against their
enemies, but they were also forced always to be prepared instantly to
ward off sudden incursions. Their leaders, including the king, personally
supervised them in the fields and directed their responses to such
military emergencies. This experience nurtured unity, a strong spirit, and
an unflinching commitment to battle. It also symbolizes the farmer-
soldier ideal later bureaucrats felt characterized the practices of antiquity
and came to be cited frequently whenever they sought to disparage the
need for professional military men and studies. (However, as discussed
in the general introduction, it should be remembered that at this time the
nobility rather than the peasants were the active members of the fighting
forces.) See, for example, Hsü Pei-ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-
shih, p. 276.
50 Career military men turned historians, such as Hsü Pei-ken, see the
long preparatory period as not just providing the time necessary to
cultivate Virtue and slowly develop the economic basis for a powerful
state with a satisfied populace but also as being the minimum interval
required to create—in accord with the Tai Kung’s strategy—the
revolutionary military weapons that would permit the Chou to effect
radical new strategies against their vastly superior enemies. General Hsü
is a particularly strong advocate of the chariot’s decisive importance at
Mu-yeh, the first battle in which it was employed en masse. Based on his
estimates, the Chou could probably not have constructed more than a
score of chariots per year—particularly armored ones—and at least three
thousand horses had to be bred and trained. Charioteers also had to
become practiced in the requisite individual skills and coordinated in
integrated battle tactics. Furthermore, a large number of bronze weapons
had to be manufactured; thus the Chou became more skilled in
metalworking techniques and developed their own styles of weapons.
(See Hsü Pei-ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-shih, pp. 284-86, and
T’ai kung Liu-t’ao chin-chu chin-i [Shang-wu yin-shu-kuan, Taipei,
1976], pp. 14-26.)
51 The T’ang imperial family’s military heritage was particularly strong,
and the early emperors valued the martial as much as or perhaps more
than the civil. Therefore, they sanctioned the creation of separate,
increasingly professional military forces and the establishment of a state
temple honoring the T’ai Kung as an exemplary military figure and the
progenitor of military studies. Confucians, who tended to denigrate the
T’ai Kung as merely a military man rather than recognizing him as a
Sage like Confucius or the duke of Chou (despite historical records
attesting to his unremitting promotion of essentially Confucian virtues),
continually opposed such efforts. In their view the civil—the li—and
concepts of virtue are all that should be required to govern well and
tranquilize the realm. (They repeatedly cited Confucius’ statement that
he never studied military affairs [Analects XV: 1] but ignored his famous
assertion [preserved in his Shih chi biography] that both the civil and
martial are necessary.) Eventually, they succeeded in having the state cult
dismantled, although the T’ai Kung unofficially continued to be a patron
figure for centuries. This unrealistic outlook no doubt greatly contributed
to China’s military weakness throughout the centuries, despite the
empire’s vast resources, technological achievements, and powerful
administrative organization. (For an extensive discussion, see D. L.
McMullen, “The Cult of Ch’i T’ai-kung and T’ang Attitudes to the
Military,” T’ang Studies 7 [1989]: 59-103; and T’ao Hsi-sheng, Ping-fa
san-shu, pp. 1-4.)
52 Conceptually, the Six Secret Teachings falls into the late Warring
states’ philosophical milieu and contains extensive material that appears
to expand Sun-tzu’s ideas. Among the most important “borrowed”
concepts are unorthodox tactics; the characteristics and role of the
general; manipulating ch’i; and identifying tactics appropriate to various
configurations of terrain. All of these are substantially advanced over the
earlier cited precursors, and may reflect the state of warfare in the third
century B.C. Furthermore, the book frequently mentions advanced
weapons, such as the crossbow and sword, and devotes entire chapters to
cavalry and infantry tactics. While these may have been added by later
generations, it seems likely the present text reached final form about the
middle to late Warring States period. (An extensive discussion may be
found in the introduction and notes to our translation of the Six Secret
Teachings in the Seven Military Classics.) The issue of borrowing and
priority is complex: many passages in the various Seven Military
Classics are similar, even identical. (This is particularly true of the Six
Secret Teachings, Wu-tzu, and Art of War.) The majority may in fact
simply represent discussions of essential topics in a common conceptual
language, perhaps based on textual materials or traditions apart from the
extant writings upon which contemporary studies must focus. For
example, the Art of War may be terse and abstract because Sun-tzu
benefited from an embryonic text of the Six Secret Teachings and was an
astute student of military thought. The absence of conceptual and textual
borrowing would probably be more remarkable than its presence because
it would indicate highly segmented and strictly preserved schools of
tactics and strategy.
53 The tradition of Chi’i military studies requires a separate work;
however, a brief discussion is found in the footnotes to the introductory
section of the Ssu-ma Fa. (Also see T’ao Hsi-sheng, Ping-fa san-shu
[Shih-huo ch’u-pan-she, Taipei, 1979], pp. 1-5, and “Chan-lüeh yüan-li
yü ko-ming fan-kung te tao-lu,” in Ping-fa san-shu, pp. 1-9; Hsü Pei-
ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-shih [Chung-yang wu-kung-ying-
she, Taipei, 1983], pp. 282-84.)
54 This appears to be Hsü Pei-ken’s position at various points in the
introduction to his modern Chinese translation, T’ai Kung Liu-t’ao chin-
chu chin-i (see pp. 6-7, 18, and 31. Also see his Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-
hsiang-shih, p. 283.) Most of the military writings cited in note 71 below
adhere to this view (for example, Li Chiu-jui, Chung-kuo chün-shih ssu-
hsiang-shih, pp. 101-02).
   The question of accretion and loss is too complex to be considered
within the scope of a note. However, in his “Treatise on Literature”
included in the dynastic history of the Former Han (written in the Later
Han), Pan Ku noted three writings associated with the T’ai Kung:
“Plans” in 81 sections; “Words,” or “Sayings,” in 71 sections; and
“Military,” or “Weapons,” in 85 sections, for a very large total of 237
sections. The present Six Secret Teachings only contains 60 sections or
chapters, although many possible remnants are scattered about in other
works. Even though a partial text has been recovered from a Han tomb,
textual reductions and losses apparently continued after the Han dynasty
as well. (Compare the Ch’ün-shu chih-yao and also Wang Chung-min,
Tun-huang ku-chi hsü-lu [Shang-wu yin-shu-kuan, Peking, 1958], p. 150.
Also see Gustav Haloun, “Legalist Fragments, Part 1: Kuan-tsi 55 and
Related Texts,” AM NS 2, no. 1 [1951-52]: 85-120.) Hsü Pei-ken, who
studied the text extensively for at least two decades, has speculated about
the possible fate of these books. First, the military writings perhaps
formed the basis for the Six Secret Teachings, although some more
general, historically oriented materials have been included. The chapters
in “Plans” may have become the essence of the Yin-fu ching, another
work associated with his name, which is traditionally thought to have
been handed down eventually through Kuei Ku-tzu to Su Ch’in. Finally,
the remaining work, “Words”—which may have been a record of his
pronouncements while he was ruler of Ch’i—could have been preserved
by Ch’i state historians and passed down within the state to ultimately
comprise the basis of the Three Strategies of Huang-shih Kung. (This
reconstruction is not generally accepted by Western scholars. For details,
see Hsü Pei-ken, TKLT CCCY, pp. 27-31.)
55 According to the Lü-shih ch’un-ch’iu, he was a shih (lowest rank of
noble) of the Eastern I people. Ch’iang people with the Chiang surname
apparently were early allies of the Chou after an even earlier period of
conflict.
   Recent scholars have questioned the veracity of the T’ai Kung’s
eastern origin. Yang Yün-ju, for example, noting the Chiang clan’s early
marriage relations with the Chou, concludes that both the Chiang and the
Chou were originally members of the northwest barbarian peoples and
that the Chiang did not venture eastward until after the Chou conquest.
See “Chiang-hsing te min-tsu ho Chiang T’ai-kung te ku-shih,” in Ku-
shih pien, ed. Ku Chieh-kang, vol. 2 (Shang-hai ku-chi, Shanghai, 1982;
original copyright 1930), pp. 113-17.
56 In all the stories about the T’ai Kung found in the various Warring
States and later writings, he is invariably portrayed as old, retired, and
poor. For example, the Shuo yüan frequently uses his late, meteoric rise
to power after an undistinguished life to illustrate that talent and merit
alone are inadequate unless one meets the proper moment. One passage
states, “When Lü Wang was fifty he sold food in Chi-chin; when he was
seventy he butchered cows in Chao-ko; so if when he was ninety he
commanded the army for the Son of Heaven, it was because he met King
Wen.” (Shuo-yüan CCCY, p. 581, and an additional reference on p. 562.)
His “lands were inadequate to repay the cost of the seeds, (the yield
from) his fishing inadequate to repay the cost of the nets, but for
governing All under Heaven he had more than enough wisdom.” (Shuo-
yüan CCCY, p. 569.) “He was an old fellow whose wife had put him out,
who had worked as a butcher’s assistant in Chao-ko and as an inn
employee in Chi-chin who welcomed guests.” (Shuo-yüan CCCY, p.
234.) In the Han-shih wai-chuan he is laboring as a boatman when he
encounters King Wen. This incident is translated in James R. Hightower,
Han shih wai chuan (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1952), pp.
140-42.
57 The term “hegemon” does not appear until centuries after the events
recorded in this biography, thus suggesting the dialogue is a late
fabrication.
58 The story about how the T’ai Kung received his name is more than a
little dubious; however, completely satisfactory explanations are lacking.
He was apparently known by several names, perhaps depending on the
recorder’s perspective and location. “T’ai Kung” should refer to his
enfeoffment as king of Ch’i and thus the state’s official progenitor. “Lü”
in “Lü Wang” probably refers to his place of origin, whereas Wang may
have been his personal name; this is also the case for “Lü Shang.”
“Shih,” in “Shih Shang-fu,” perhaps referred to his command position,
“T’ai Shih,” rather than to his role as preceptor (shih) to Kings Wen and
Wu. “Shang-fu,” or “Father Shang,” may be an honorific reference from
the two kings toward their army’s commander in chief or perhaps their
strategist-adviser. (See Yang Yün-ju, “Chiang-hsing,” pp. 109-12.)
59 The Shih chi biography states he was appointed as a shih, which
generally means “commander” but can also include didactic functions, as
in “preceptor” or “teacher.” Clearly, the T’ai Kung’s role was far more
encompassing and was related more to strategy than command.
Historical references apart from the Shih chi do not record him as being
commander in chief (normally a role the Chou king should personally
have filled), but he seems to have commanded a force at the battle of
Mu-yeh and led the initial charge to instigate the conflict. (See the “Chou
Annals” in the Shih chi. Also note his superior role in the command of
forces securing the area after the conquest in the I-Chou shu.)
   Traditional sources indicate that subsequently, King Wu married the
T’ai Kung’s daughter and that she became one of the ten great ministers
of his reign. (See Wei Ju-lin, Chung-kuo li-tai ming-chiang chi ch’i
yung-ping ssu-hsiang [Chung-yang wen-wu kung-ying-she, Taipei,
1981], p. 2.)
60 The practice of traveling about to seek receptive rulers on whom to
exercise one’s persuasion is identified with the Warring States period and
should be considered anachronistic. However, he may have traveled
about in disguise, trying to perceive a single opportunity, or he may
simply have been exceptional.
61 Mencius twice mentions that the T’ai Kung dwelled on the coast of
the Eastern Sea to avoid King Chou (Mencius, IVA:14, VIIA:22) and
also refers to him and San-i Sheng as having known King Wen (Mencius,
VIIB:38). The Hsin shu mentions him “coming from the sea coast to
give his allegiance” (Hsin shu, 10:9B).
62 Because the concept of unorthodox (ch’i) stratagems is attributed
primarily to Sun-tzu, it is interesting to note the Shih chi’s appraisal of
the T’ai Kung’s achievements in this regard.
63 For a brief discussion of ch’üan, see note 125 to the translation.
64 These conquests and alliances secured their base of operations and
allowed them to expand toward the Shang domain. For further
discussion, see Hsu and Linduff, Western Chou Civilization, pp. 89-92.
65 This very famous sentence is cited repeatedly by the T’ai Kung’s
detractors to support their contention that Virtue alone, rather than the
Tai Kung’s despicable machinations, was enough to win the empire for
the Chou.
66 Whether “Tsang-ssu” refers to a green, nine-headed river animal
(originally based on a rhinoceros?) and is being invoked as a spirit to
lend power to the oath or scare the men or refers to an officer for the
boats is the subject of speculation.
67 The question has frequently been raised as to why King Wu did not
immediately lead an attack on the Shang, particularly when he could
have capitalized on the element of surprise. Various explanations have
been offered, among them that King Wu felt his strength and
preparations were still insufficient or that perhaps he had not expected
such an overwhelming response and had neither supplies nor plans to
support an attack. (Although concrete plans could have been formulated
in the intervening two years, little more could have been done to
dramatically alter the balance of forces.) Other suggestions include
General Hsü’s belief that the Chou did not bring their chariots to the
assembly but concealed them for explosive use in the actual engagement
and that this rally represented a sort of dress rehearsal. King Chou’s
minions certainly reported the events in detail, including King Wu’s
public acknowledgment—despite startling support to the contrary—that
a subject should not attack his ruler. This sustained King Chou’s
complacency and arrogance—the “Shang Annals” indicate his disdain
for any Chou threat to his power and his certainty that he would continue
to enjoy the sanction of Heaven—and set the stage for the next meeting,
which was then similarly regarded. King Wu thus was able to advance
swiftly by an indirect southern route (fording the frozen river in an area
supposedly well-known to the T’ai Kung who, according to one source,
had sold rice there) and approach the capital before King Chou could
muster all his forces and recall his expeditionary forces in the south. (See
Hsü Pei-ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-shih, pp. 285-86, and
Chung-kuo li-tai chang-cheng-shih , vol. 1, pp. 74-76; and the statements
attributed to King Chou in the “Shang Annals.”)
68 The murder of Pi-kan and other events (such as the high officials
fleeing to Chou with the sacrificial musical instruments) no doubt
precipitated the king’s decision to attack Shang.
   The T’ai Kung’s rejection of bad weather and ill portents is
remarkable for an age obsessed with such beliefs. In his view, even
though he claimed the Mandate of Heaven, how could the signs be
auspicious for a ruler about to attack his sovereign? (Note that this
incident, with additional dialogue, also appears in the Han shih wai-
chuan. See Hightower’s translation, Han shih wai chuan, pp. 89-90.)
   Although the T’ai Kung was obviously daring and resolute, some
scholars have cited such statements as evidence that this material is
fabricated because such pragmatic, unmystical views were not common
until the Warring States period, when the military classics began to reject
the influence of portents and signs. However, although there are serious
doubts about the veracity of the details, this opinion perhaps too
conveniently assumes a nonexistent homogeneity of thought and
recklessly denies the possibility of the exceptional.
69 The “Shang Annals” records the manner of the king’s death rather
differently: “On chia-tzu King Chou’s troops were defeated. King Chou
raced back in and mounted the Deer Tower. He clothed himself in his
treasures and jade, went into the fire and died. King Wu of the Chou
subsequently chopped off Chou’s head, hanging it up with a white
pennon” (Shih-chi chin-chu, vol. 1, p. 96). The I-Chou shu account in the
“Shih-fu” chapter similarly records that King Chou immolated himself,
whereas in the “Chou Annals” King Wu symbolically shoots King Chou
with three arrows, then decapitates him.
70 The nine great bronze cauldrons symbolized imperial authority, and
possessing them was deemed a matter of great consequence in
establishing dynastic power and legitimacy.
71 An analysis and discussion of the battle of Mu-yeh merits a separate
chapter. Among the many unresolved questions, perhaps the most
important concerns the relative strength of the respective forces.
According to the Shih chi and some other accounts, the Shang fielded
seven hundred thousand men, whereas the Chou only had three hundred
chariots, three thousand Tiger Guards, and forty-five thousand armored
soldiers. The number for the Shang is extremely suspect and is subject to
various explanations: It may be a general expression of size; an error for
what should be seventy thousand or one hundred seventy thousand; or
the total troops of the entire Shang forces, including all their allies—
many of whom were already committed in other areas. The numbers for
the Chou seem more reasonable but in fact may only refer to their core
forces without including those of their allies. (Clearly, however, the
forces of the Chou were vastly outnumbered by those of the Shang.)
Depending on the source consulted, the actual battle either required little
expenditure of forces—with the Shang troops offering minimal
resistance to their king’s morally superior enemy—or the carnage
flooded the fields with blood. (Both the Shang shu and the Shih chi
assert that the Shang troops “inverted their weapons” and otherwise
offered little resistance.) The I-Chou shu lists 177,779 killed and 310,230
captured as a result of the entire campaign, which are astounding figures.
(For brief discussions, see Edward L. Shaughnessy, “ ‘New’ Evidence on
the Zhou conquest,” pp. 57-61.)
   Notwithstanding the above evidence, the actual battle appears to have
quickly turned into a rout and have ended within a few hours of the
initial clash. Among the factors favoring the Chou was their commitment
to the cause and consequent great fighting spirit, in contrast to the
apparently reluctant, despondent Shang troops. The Chou forces were
thoroughly trained and prepared, whereas the Shang were said to be
deficient in both respects. The Chou unleashed an initial charge of one
hundred elite stalwarts, headed by the T’ai Kung, and immediately
followed with a chariot attack that moved swiftly across the plains. The
combined effect both startled and terrified the Shang troops, who had not
previously encountered massed chariot assaults. (Skeptics, however,
such as Hsu and Linduff [Western Chou Civilization, pp. 81-88] believe
superior infantry played the critical role and that the chariots were
unimportant.) King Chou reportedly turned and fled, and his command
immediately disintegrated. Because the Chou had strongly publicized
(through charges possibly similar to those in the Shang shu) that King
Chou—rather than the people—was the designated enemy, any
compulsion to fight on the part of the Shang was seriously undermined.
The battle and choice of battlefield were forced on the Shang because the
Chou had crossed to the south—avoiding the bulwark of standing Shang
defenses—and swiftly advanced. Finally, the Chou had prepared in
secret, established a series of power bases, and either neutralized or
gained the allegiance of states and peoples along the attack route and
around the Shang. Although the Shang had obviously engineered their
own self-destruction by alienating the people and eliminating effective
administrators, the Chou may also have used many of the measures
advocated in the Cultural Warfare chapter of the Six Secret Teachings to
further subvert them. For general discussions of these factors, see Chang
Shao-sheng and Liu Wen-ch’an, eds., Chung-kuo ku-tai chan-cheng
t’ung-lan, 2 vols. (Ch’ang-cheng ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1985), pp. 7-10;
Li Chen, Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng shih-hua (Li-ming, Taipei, 1985,)
pp. 13-19; Hsü Pei-ken, Chung-kuo kuo-fang ssu-hsiang-shih, pp. 282-
90, and Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih , vol. 1, pp. 71-84.
72 Being in accord with local customs while still influencing the people
is one of the keystones of the T’ai Kung’s military thought and is
consonant with post-conquest Chou policies. Its wisdom was proven
subsequently by numerous historical incidents, including military
disasters.
73 These measures are all associated historically with the state of Ch’i
and with its heritage of Legalist thought.
74 King Wu died about two years after the conquest, providing an
opportunity for his brothers—in alliance with the Shang prince who was
retained in heavily circumscribed, essentially symbolic power—to revolt.
The duke of Chou together with the duke of Shao and possibly the T’ai
Kung required three years to subdue the dissident peoples.
75 This charge appears in the Tso chuan. Cf. Legge, The Chinese
Classics: The Ch’un Ts’ew with The Tso Chuen, vol. 5, pp. 139-40.
76 “Expansive” should probably be understood as outgoing, energetic,
active.
77 “The Hereditary House of Ch’i T’ai Kung,” Shih chi, chüan 32,
translated from Shih-chi chin-chu, vol. 3, pp. 1502-06, 1535.
78 The authenticity of Shang shu chapters is much debated; the
consensus is that some portions may be early Chou material but that the
bulk represents later composition.
79 See, for example, Edward L. Shaughnessy, “‘New’ Evidence on the
Zhou Conquest,” pp. 60-61.
80 See Sarah Allan, “The Identities of Taigong Wang in Zhou and Han
Literature,” MS. 30 (1972-73), pp. 57-99. Allan concludes that the T’ai
Kung commanded the forces in the famous battles and was also accorded
a special status in ritual affairs that was essentially equal to that of the
royal clan members (p. 67). Her conclusion is based in part on early
Book of Odes verses, which she notes as the only Western Chou
references to the T’ai Kung (p. 59). However, Shaughnessy’s article has
proven the authenticity of the “Shih-fu” chapter of the I-Chou shu
(which is not mentioned in Allan’s article), and additional contemporary
evidence shows that the T’ai Kung commanded troops and was entrusted
with critical security operations. (See Shaughnessy, “‘New’ Evidence on
the Zhou Conquest,” pp. 57, 67. Also see Ku Chieh-kang, “I-Chou-shu
‘Shih-fu’ p’ien chiao-chu hsieh-ting yü p’ing-lun,” Wen-shih 2 [1963]: 1-
42. Ku similarly concludes that the “Shih-fu” chapter is an authentic
record and provides glosses on the passage referring to the T’ai Kung on
pp. 6-7 of his article. It should also be noted that Allan’s article states
that the authentic historical material always refers to the T’ai Kung as
“Shih Shang-fu” (“Taigong Wang,” p. 60). However, in the I-Chou shu
he is referred to as “T’ai Kung Wang,” and in the first chapter of the
recently discovered bamboo strips of the Six Secret Teachings he is
called “Lü Shang.” (See Lo Fu-i, “Lin-i Han-chien kai-shu,” WW, 1974:
2, p. 33.)
81 Allan, “Taigong Wang,” pp. 68-72. The Chiang, as previously
discussed, were allies of the Chou and furnished troops in the decisive
battles. (Unfortunately, this explanation is not entirely satisfactory
because it fails to account adequately for the T’ai Kung’s early,
apparently menial status—one hardly befitting an important ally. Allan
suggests that the motif of recognition may underlie these legends (see
discussion, pp. 89-98), and it is an important theme in Chinese thought.
For example, see Eric Henry, “The Motif of Recognition in Early
China,” HJAS, 47, no. 1 (1987): 5-30; and Ralph D. Sawyer, Knowing
Men (Kaofeng, Taipei, 1979). Henry only mentions the T’ai Kung in a
footnote.
82 It need hardly be mentioned that all of the contemporary military
historians in both Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China whose
works have been cited in the notes above not only accept the fact of the
T’ai Kung’s existence but also attribute the major strategic and command
role to him. Accordingly, they tend to see his thoughts as being largely
preserved in the Six Secret Teachings, even though they have either been
much revised over the centuries or were actually composed at a later
date. (Western scholars, such as Hsu and Linduff, generally tend to
ignore him altogether, although in his Origins of Statecraft [pp. 343-344]
Creel posits his authenticity.)
   References to the T’ai Kung are found throughout pre-Han writings—
such as Mencius, Sun-tzu’s Art of War, Hsün-tzu, Han Fei-tzu, Lü-shih
ch’un-ch’iu, Huai-nan tzu, Kuo yü and Shuo yüan. Extensive dialogues
attributed to the T’ai Kung and King Wu also appear in the Shuo yüan,
and several pages of quotations are preserved in the T’ung tien. That his
historical authenticity has been doubted seems remarkable and perhaps
symbolizes much about the nature of thought in China.
83 See Edward L. Shaughnessy, “‘New’ Evidence on the Zhou
Conquest,” pp. 66-67.
84 Herrlee G. Creel’s classic work, The Origins of Statecraft in China,
still contains the most extensive reconstruction and discussion of these
measures as well as of the Chou military. However, also see Hsu and
Linduff, Western Chou Civilization.
85 See Hsu and Linduff, Western Chou Civilization, pp. 113-19; and Tu
Cheng-sheng, “Lüeh-lun Yin i-min te tsao-yü yü ti-wei,” BIHP 53
(December 1982): 661-709.
86 For a discussion of the meaning of “army” in this period, see the
section entitled Military Organization at the end of the introduction.
87 See Cho-yün Hsü’s extensive analysis, Ancient China in Transition
(Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1965).
88 See the translator’s introduction and notes to the Ssu-ma Fa
translation. The emphasis on discipline and concerted action evident
throughout the Seven Military Classics reflects this shift from the noble
days of chariot warfare. For additional discussion of the code of chivalry
and its inevitable decline, see Frank A. Kierman, Jr., “Phases and Modes
of Combat in Early China,” in Chinese Ways in Warfare, ed. Franz A.
Kierman, Jr., and John K. Fairbank (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, 1974), pp. 27-66.
89 This incident, as recorded in the Tso chuan for the first year of Duke
Chao, has historical importance because it shows the “barbarian” enemy
fighting solely as infantrymen rather than mounted on horses or from
chariots. In addition, the Chou’s realization of the limitations of chariot
warfare is clearly shown by the necessity they felt to abandon their own
chariots and engage the enemy in confined valley terrain. The reluctance
of at least one high official to relinquish his honored position as a
charioteer and descend to the status of a foot soldier (for which he was
summarily executed) also illustrates the prevailing attitude even this late
in the Spring and Autumn period. (See Legge’s translation of the
incident, The Chinese Classics: vol. 5, The Ch’un Ts’ew with The Tso
Chuen [Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1872; reprinted Chin-hsüeh
shu-chü, Taipei, 1968], p. 579.) Wei Shu initiated the conversion and
formulated a plan whose effectiveness was augmented by its
deceptiveness. To confuse the enemy he deployed the combined chariot
and accompanying infantry forces in an unusual, unbalanced formation,
provoking the enemy’s laughter and ridicule—until the Chin forces
sprang into action and routed them. “Be deceptive” was a dictum clearly
in the minds of commanders in this era, a century or two before Sun-
tzu’s Art of War. (For further discussion and analysis, see Ping-fa, p. 36,
and the Wu-pei-chih 53, pp. 22B-24B.) As the infantry expanded,
officers from the nobility were assigned to command them, and rank was
granted to everyone—regardless of status—for military achievement.
Consequently, the status of the foot soldier improved dramatically, and
although the old attitudes (which disdained foot assignment against the
prestige of being assigned to the chariot) were never completely erased,
their amelioration marked a significant change (see Ping-fa, p. 58).
   It should be noted that chariots were not employed at this time in such
peripheral southeastern states as Wu and Yüeh. Initially, this might have
been because of ignorance and unsuitable terrain, but even after they
were taught the skills of chariot driving and the tactics of warfare
deployment, these and several other states fielded only infantry units.
(For further discussion, see Tu Cheng-sheng, “Chou-tai feng-chien
chieh-t’i-hou te chün-cheng hsin-chih-hsü,” BIHP 55 no. 1 [1984]: 74-
75, 82-89; Ping-fa, p. 58; Yang K’uan, “Ch’un-ch’iu Chan-kuo-chien,”
p. 11; and Yang Hung, Chung-kuo ku-ping-ch’i, p. 126.)
90 Another weapon, the chi, probably began to appear in some numbers
around this time. The chi, or “spear-tipped dagger-ax,” differed from the
dagger-ax in one formidable aspect: It had a metal point at the top of the
shaft to allow thrusting and stabbing. With the addition of this spear tip,
the weapon could be used for an initial stabbing thrust, but if the target
were missed, it could be pulled back or swung to catch the enemy with
the knifelike horizontal blade. In the early stages it was probably made
from two separate bronze parts, which were secured to a pole; this has
prompted some archaeologists to argue that the chi has a longer history
than is generally acknowledged. (After the wooden shaft had completely
disintegrated, the two parts, which would be found separately, would be
misinterpreted as having come from two weapons—a dagger-ax and a
spear—rather than being parts of an integrated, composite one.)
However, it appears that the chi was primarily a foot soldier’s weapon,
perhaps developed to better equip them to attack chariots; thus it grew in
popularity as infantry forces were augmented. In Shang tombs only ko
(halberds, dagger-axes) are found, whereas Han excavations yield only
chi, or spear-tipped dagger-axes. In the thousand years between the
demise of the Shang and the flourishing of the Han, chi were probably
created in the early Chou or Spring and Autumn periods, gradually
becoming more popular until proliferating in the Warring States era. For
detailed discussions, see Kuo Pao-chün, “Ko chi yü-lun,” pp. 313-26;
Kuo Mo-jo, Yin Chou ch’ing-t’ung-ch’i ming-wen yen-chiu, (Jenmin
ch’u-pan-she, Shanghai, 1954), pp. 172-86; Ma Heng, “Ko chi chih yen-
chiu,” pp. 745-53; Chou Wei, Chung-kuo ping-ch’i shih-kao, pp. 88-98;
and Hayashi Minao, Chūgoku In-Shū jidai no buki, pp. 10-13 and 78-96.
   In an article examining a multiple-blade chi excavated from a Warring
States tomb, Sun Chi concludes that this sort of weapon was probably
wielded by charioteers against foot soldiers and thus represented a
response to the growth of infantry forces and their mounting threat to the
chariot. (The attachment of knife blades to the wheel hubs served a
similar function, as his article discusses on p. 83.) This implies further
questions about the evolution of the chi—whether it was developed for
infantrymen or for chariot-mounted warriors contending with other
chariots or infantrymen—to which answers are unavailable. See Sun Chi,
“Yu-jen ch’e-wei yü to-ko-chi,” WW, 1980: 12, pp. 83-85.
91 See the last part of the introduction for details and also note 100
below.
92 Some of these qualifications are recorded in Hsün-tzu, the Wu-tzu,
and itemized in the Six Secret Teachings.
93 The Seven Strong States at the start of the Warring States period, as
identified by Liu Hsiang’s classic list, were Ch’i, Yen, the Three Chin
(Han, Chao, Wei), and the newly powerful, originally peripheral states of
Ch’u and Ch’in. Wu and Yüeh, two other so-called barbarian states, also
emerged as significant forces.
94 The Ssu-ma Fa discusses the distinctions that mark the form and spirit
of the civilian and military realms and advises against their becoming
confused or intermixed. Most of the Seven Military Classics discuss the
qualifications necessary for generalship, reflecting the rising concern
with professionalism and a turning away from the preoccupation with
moral qualifications found in the Tso chuan. Ironically, in earlier times
the Shang and Chou kings as well as the local vassal lords not only
governed their respective realms but also commanded the army and
exercised supreme military power. Over time they became divorced from
the complexities of battle. Further discussion will be found in the
introduction to the Art of War translation.
95 Strategic points, such as passes and major road intersections, were
increasingly guarded and fortified. The northern states, such as Yen and
Chao, sought to diminish the mobility of mounted nomadic forces by
creating static defense systems (“walls”) along their lengthy, exposed
borders. See Yang K’uan, “Ch’unch’iu Chan-kuo-chien feng-chien te
chün-shih tsu-chih ho chan-cheng te pien-hua,” p. 12. Also note Arthur
Waldron’s work on “walls”; “The Problem of the Great Wall of China,”
HJAS 43, no. 2 (1983): 643-63; and The Great Wall of China: From
History to Myth (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990).
96 See Yang Hung, Chung-kuo ku-ping-ch’i, pp. 140-41; and Ping-fa,
pp. 78-89. The Mohists were famous for their doctrine of not making
distinctions in one’s love for his fellow man. Under the direction of Mo-
tzu (fl. 479-438 B.C.)—their founder and leader—they actively practiced
their doctrine of opposing warfare, rushing to aid the defense of the
besieged. See Robin D. S. Yates, “Siege Engines and Late Zhou Military
Technology,” in Explorations in the History of Science and Technology
in China, ed. Li Guohao et al., (Shanghai Chinese Classics Publishing
House, Shanghai, 1982), pp. 409-51, for a discussion of the technology
that appeared in this period. For the medieval period, which includes the
T’ang (the era of the Questions and Replies), see Herbert Franke, “Siege
and Defense of Towns in Medieval China,” in Chinese Ways in Warfare,
pp. 151-94.
97 Although early Chinese compound bows were extremely powerful,
crossbows provided dramatically more formidable firepower; their
strength and effective killing range generally increased over the centuries
as their mechanisms were perfected. The earliest type was probably
hand-cocked, using only arm strength. More powerful versions required
leg strength, and the strongest used a rope attached to the waist to pull
the sling back. (See Hsü Chung-shu, “I-she yü nu,” pp. 435-38.) By the
end of the Warring States period, crossbows had come into extensive use,
although their strategic value was probably not exploited fully until the
Han dynasty. Hand-held crossbows, which fired two bolts
simultaneously, and repeating models (as well as repeating double-bolt
models) dating from the Warring States period have now been excavated,
reflecting the crossbow’s technological sophistication and importance.
(See Ch’en Yüeh-chün, “Chiang-ling Ch’u-mu ch’u-t’u shuang-shih
ping-she lien-fa-nu yen-chiu,” WW, 1990: 5, pp. 89-96.) Larger, winch-
powered models mounted on chariots or carriages, also capable of
shooting multiple bolts, are described in the Six Secret Teachings and are
discussed in the translation. (Also see Robin D. S. Yates, “Siege Engines
and Late Zhou Military Technology,” pp. 432-43.)
   Tradition holds that the Yellow Emperor invented the crossbow, and
Hsü Chung-shu, analyzing linguistic evidence, strongly believes that
both the bow and crossbow are indigenous developments dating from
pre-Shang times. (See Hsü Chung-shu, “I-she yü nu chih su-yüan chi
kuan-yü tz’u-lei ming-wu chih k’aoshih,” pp. 417-18, 438.) However,
Hsü’s classic view not withstanding, based on textual references and
other linguistic evidence it appears the crossbow probably originated
outside the central states area of China, perhaps in Ch’u or the south-
west. (See Jerry Norman and Tsu-lin Mei, “The Austroasiatics in Ancient
South China: Some Lexical Evidence,” MS 32 [1976]: 293-94; Yang
Hung, Ku-pingch’i , pp. 143-44; and Ch’en Yüeh-chün, “Lien-fa-nu,” p.
96.) Remnants of crossbows with bronze trigger mechanisms have been
found in tombs from the middle Warring States period, prompting
scholars such as Kao Chih-hsi to argue for a much earlier (indigenous)
invention—probably in the Spring and Autumn period—using wooden
components. (See Kao Chih-hsi, “Chi Ch’ang-sha, Ch’ang-te ch’u-t’u
nu-chi te Chan-kuo-mu—chien-t’an yu-kuan nu-chi, kung-shih te chi-ke
wen-t’i,” WW, 1964: 6, pp. 41-44. Also see Ch’en Yüeh-chün, “Lien-fa-
nu,” p. 96. Note that as of this writing, no pre-Warring States crossbows
have been discovered. See Hayashi’s Minao’s extensive, although dated,
summary, Chūgoku In-Shū jidai no buki, pp. 301-30.) The first recorded
tactical use appears to have been at the battle of Ma-ling in 341 B.C., as
depicted in the Shih-chi and the text of the Sun Pin’s Ping-fa. The Spring
and Autumn Annals of Wu and Yüeh also contain numerous references to
crossbows, but truly extensive employment probably began with the
Han, who exploited their superior firepower and range.
98 See the last part of the introduction for an annotated discussion of the
cavalry in Chinese history.
99 The speed and mobility of the cavalry in all but the most impenetrable
forests and marshes allowed the development of unorthodox tactics
(ch’i) versus orthodox (cheng) methods. Although infantry forces can
also be employed in unorthodox ways, an essential aspect of the
unorthodox is its unexpectedness, its exploitation of surprise, for which
the cavalry is ideally suited. Sun-tzu is generally credited with advancing
the idea of the unorthodox, and it is extensively discussed and expanded
in the Questions and Replies (based on actual employment by T’ang
T’ai-tsung and General Li in decisive battles when they were struggling
to establish the T’ang). The Six Secret Teachings also analyzes the
relative methods for employing infantry, chariot, and cavalry forces.
100 Iron was used extensively for the agricultural implements—
generally manufactured and distributed under government monopoly—
during the Warring States period. The Japanese scholar Sekino Takeshi
has advanced the idea that cheap, readily available, mass-produced iron
swords provided Ch’in’s conscripted infantry forces their great killing
power. (Cf. Sekino Takeshi, “Chūgoku shoki bunka no ikkōsatsu—
dōtestsu katoki no kaimei ni yosete,” Shigaku zasshi, 60 [October 1951]:
867-907.) However, others strongly dispute his contention for a variety
of reasons. First, the sword had always been a weapon of the nobility and
was generally carried by officers rather than ordinary infantrymen. (Cf.
Noel Barnard, “Did the Swords Exist,” EC [1978-79], pp. 62-63.) They
would naturally have preferred the familiar elegance of the bronze
weapon over the cruder iron sword. Second, bronze swords were
probably still superior to early iron versions in the hands of the skilled
warrior, and complex metal-working technology (such as layering with
different alloys) produced very sharp, fine weapons. Third, few iron
swords have been unearthed—even from the famous tombs of Ch’in
Shih-Huang-ti, where most of the warriors are armed with bronze rather
than iron weapons. (Cf. Noel Barnard, “Did the Swords Exist,” p. 63;
David N. Keightley, “Where Have All the Swords Gone?” EC 2 [1976],
pp. 31-34.) Thus several scholars have concluded that the Han era marks
the true ascension of iron weapons, with the bronze sword becoming an
anachronism thereafter. For a dissenting view, see Li Xueqin, “Iron
Objects,” in Eastern Zhou and Qin Civilizations (Yale University Press,
New Haven, 1985), pp. 315-29, who notes that China had cast iron,
wrought iron, and steel by the Warring States era, which suggests a long
prehistory in the Spring and Autumn period.)
101 See Wu Ch’i’s biography in the translator’s introduction to the Wu-
tzu.
102 The battle of Ma-ling is apparently the first recorded conflict in
which crossbows were employed. (There are also different versions
regarding who exercised ultimate command—P’ang Chüan, who may
have been killed at the earlier battle, or the imperial prince, who sallied
forth with the home defense forces. General P’ang’s character flaws and
rashness were frequently cited by Chinese military analysts as evidence
of the need for a constellation of virtues in any supreme commander.)
103 The complex process of analyzing language, concepts, and historical
events to create a systematic textual chronology has been both
complicated and simplified by the writings discovered in various tombs
in recent decades. The detailed textual studies of Ch’ing dynasty
scholars, although valuable for understanding the texts themselves, have
led to conclusions that must now be reexamined and revised.
(Discussions of the provenance of the individual Seven Military Classics
are found in each introduction. For a general discussion, see Robin D. S.
Yates, “New Light on Ancient Chinese Military Texts,” TP 74 [1988];
211-48.)
104 See Hayashi Minao, “Chūgoku sen-Shin jidai no basha,” Tōhō
Gakuhō 29 (1959); p. 225.
105 Cf. Edward L. Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives on the
Introduction of the Chariot into China,” HJAS, 48, no. 1 (1988): p. 190.
106 Cf. ibid., pp. 192, 208.
107 Cf. Cheng Te-k’un, Chou China (W. Heffer & Sons, Ltd.,
Cambridge, 1963), pp. 265-72.
108 Cf. Stuart Piggott, “Chariots in the Caucasus and in China,”
Antiquity 48 (1974): pp. 16-24.
109 Cf. Shih Chang-ju, “Yin-hsü tsui-chin chih chung-yao fa-hsien,”
Chung-kuo k’ao-ku hsüeh-pao, no. 2 (1947): p. 20.
110 See, among others, Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives,” p. 198.
111 Cf. Ku Chieh-kang and Yang Hsiang-k’uei, “Chung-kuo ku-tai ch’e-
chan k’ao-lüeh,” Tung-fang tsa-chih 34, no. 1 (1937): pp. 52-53; and also
the descriptions in the Six Secret Teachings.
112 Cf. Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives,” pp. 199, 213-21; Herrlee
G. Creel, The Origins of Statecraft in China (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1970); p. 271; and Hayashi, “Basha,” p. 278.
113 Cf. Ku and Yang, “Ch’e-chan,” pp. 39-54.
114 Cf. Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives,” p. 217; for Creel’s
doubts about barbarians employing chariots, see Statecraft, p. 266.
115 Cf. Cheng, Chou, p. 266; Kawamata Masanori, “Higashi Ajia no
kodai sensha to Nishi-Ajia,” Koshi Shunjū 4 (1987), pp. 38-58; for a
dissenting opinion, see Shih Chang-ju, “Yin-shü,” p. 22.
116 See Ku and Yang, “Ch’e-chan,” p. 49.
117 Cf. ibid., p. 44; and Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives,” pp. 224-
25.
118 Cf. Creel, Statecraft, pp. 262-69.
119 Cf. Yang Hung, “Ch’e-chan-yü chan-ch’e,” WW, 1977: 5, pp. 82-90
(also incorporated into his book, Chung-kuo ku-ping-ch’i lun-ts’ung
[Wen-wu ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1980]).
120 Cf. Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives,” pp. 222-23.
121 See Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, p. 126; Li Xueqin, Eastern Zhou and
Qin Civilizations (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1985), pp. 198,
272.
122 See Creel, Statecraft, pp. 256-62.
123 Cf. Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, p. 100.
124 Cf. Creel, Statecraft, note 61, pp. 262-63.
125 Shaughnessy, “Historical Perspectives,” p. 227.
126 See Shih, “Yin-shü,” pp. 21-22.
127 Cf. Chan Li and Chou Shih-ch’ü, “Shih-t’an Yang-chia-wan Han-wu
ch’i-ping-yung,” WW, 1977: 10, pp. 22.
128 E. G. Pulleyblank, “Tribe and State: Prehistoric and Historic Times,”
in The Origins of Chinese Civilization, ed. David N. Keightley
(University of California Press, Berkeley, 1983), p. 450.
129 W. Perceval Yetts, “The Horse: A Factor in Early Chinese History,”
Eurasia Septentionalis Antiqua 9 (1934): p. 236.
130 These passages are discussed in the footnotes to the translations. For
a summary of the current view, including comments on Sun Pin’s brief
statements, see Chauncey S. Goodrich, “Riding Astride and the Saddle in
Ancient China,” HJAS 44, no. 2 (1984): pp. 220-81.
131 Pulleyblank, “Tribe and State,” p. 450.
132 See Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, pp. 28-29.
133 See Yetts, “The Horse,” pp. 231-36; Herrlee G. Creel, “The Role of
the Horse in Chinese History,” in Creel, What is Taoism and Other
Studies in Chinese Cultural History (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1970), pp. 160-86; and Friedrich Hirth, “The Story of Chang
K’ien, China’s Pioneer in Western Asia,’ JAOS 37 (1917): pp. 89-116.
134 See Chan and Chou, “Han-mu,” pp. 26-27.
135 A summary based primarily on Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, pp. 4-96;
Chou Wei, Chung-kuo ping-ch’i shih-kao (Ming-wen shu-chü, Taipei,
1980), pp. 169ff; and Albert E. Dien, “A Study of Early Chinese Armor,”
Artibus Asiae 43 (1981-82): 5-66.
136 See, among many others, Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, p. 93; Noel
Barnard, “Did the Swords Exist,” EC, no. 4 (1978-79): p. 62; Kuo Yü-
kou, “Yin Chou te ch’ing-tung wu-ch’i,” KK, 1961: 2, pp. 114-15; and
Max Loehr, “The Earliest Chinese Swords and the Akinakes,” Oriental
Art 1 (1948): pp. 132-36.
137 Cf. Barnard, “Did the Swords Exist,” p. 62.
138 T’ung En-cheng, “Wo-kuo Hsi-nan ti-ch’ü ch’ing-t’ung-chien te
yen-chiu,” KK, 1977: 2, pp. 35-55. Also see Cho-yun Hsu and Katheryn
M. Linduff, Western Chou Civilization (Yale University Press, New
Haven, 1988), pp. 77-81.
139 Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, pp. 125-26.
140 Cf. Chou Wei, Chung-kuo ping-ch’i shih-kao, pp. 88-98.
141 Cf. Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, p. 126.
142 See Kwang-chih Chang, “The Chinese Bronze Age: A Modern
Synthesis,” in Wen Fong, ed., The Great Bronze Age of China (Knopf,
New York, 1980), p. 45; Chang, Chung-kuo ch’ing-t’ung shih-tai
(Chung-wen Ta-hsüeh ch’u-pan-she, Hong Kong, 1982), p. 13.
143 Cf. Emma C. Bunker, “The Steppe Connection,” EC 9-10 (1983-85):
pp. 72-73.
144 See Loehr, “The Earliest Chinese Swords,” pp. 132-42.
145 Cf. Chou Wei, Chung-kuo ping-ch’i shih-kao, pp. 112-16.
146 See Yang Hung, Ku-ping-ch’i, p. 129.
147 Hayashi Minao, Chūgoku In-Shū jidai no buki (Kyoto Daigaku
Jimbun Kagaku Kenkyūsho, Kyoto, 1972), pp. 199-236.
148 Chou Wei, Chung-kuo ping-ch’i shih-kao, pp. 109-57. The number
of articles that have appeared in PRC archaeological publications since
1970 is too great to list in detail.
149 Tu Cheng-sheng, “Chou-tai feng-chien chieh-t’i-hou te chün-cheng
hsin-chih-hsü—pien-hu ch’i-min te yen-chiu chih-erh,” BIHP 55, no. 1
(1984): p. 75.
150 Yang K’uan, “Ch’un-ch’iu Chan-kuo-chien feng-chien te chün-shih
tsu-chih ho chan-cheng te pien-hua,” Li-shih chiao-hsüeh, no. 4 (1954):
pp. 7-8.
151 For discussion, see K. C. Chang, Shang Civilization (Yale University
Press, New Haven, 1980), pp. 195-96; Hsu and Linduff, Western Chou
Civilization, p. 85.
152 Cf. Yen I-p’ing, “Yin-Shang ping-chih,” Chung-kuo wen-tzu, NS 7
(1983): 24-28; and Chung-kuo chün-shih-shih, vol. 4: Ping-fa (Chieh-
fang-chün ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1988), pp. 7-13.
153 Cf. Yen I-p’ing, “Yin-Shang ping-chih,” p. 38.
154 Hsu and Linduff, Western Chou Civilization, p. 164.
155 Lao Kan, “Chan-kuo shih-tai te chan-cheng fang-fa,” BIHP 37
(1967): p. 48.
156 Chin Hsiang-heng, “Ts’ung chia-ku pu-ts’u yen-chiu Yin Shang
chün-lü-chung chih wang-tsu san-hsing san-shih,” Chung-kuo wen-tzu 52
(1974): pp. 7B-14A; and Ping-fa, p. 14. Chin believes chün represents an
expansion of shih and that the Chou only used the term shih.
157 Tu Cheng-sheng, “Hsin-chih-hsü,” p. 78.
158 Cf. ibid., pp. 75, 78.
159 See Ping-fa, pp. 15-25, for a discussion of basic deployment
principles. Additional comments are found in the footnotes to the
translations.
160 Cf. Yen I-p’ing, “Yin-Shang ping-chih,” p. 24. A decade-based
system is found in the Wei Liao-tzu.
161 For Western terms, see John I. Alger, Definitions and Doctrine of the
Military Art (Avery Publishing Group, Wayne, N.J.), p. 1985.
162 Cf. Chang, Shang Civilization, p. 195.
163 See Lao Kan, “Chan-kuo shih-tai,” p. 47.
164 See Tu Cheng-sheng, “Hsin-chih-hsü,” p. 92. The term designates
the armies of the left, center, and right; but when more than three armies
are fielded, then it refers to the left and right flanks and the center force,
depending on how they are integrated and commanded.
165 Yang K’uan, “Ch’un-ch’iu pien-hua,” p. 11; Chin Hsiang-heng,
“San-hsing san-shih,” p. 9A.
166 Cf. Hsü Hsi-ch’en, “Chou-tai ping-chih ch’u-lun,” Chung-kuo-shih
yen-chiu , no. 4 (1985): 4-6; Chang, Shang Civilization, pp. 161-65.
167 Cf. Hsü, “Chou-tai ping-chih,” pp. 6-8; and Yang K’uan, “Ch’un-
ch’iu pien-hua,” pp. 8-10.
168 See Tu Cheng-sheng, “Hsin-chih-hsü,” p. 74.
                    Notes to the Introduction


Abbreviations and basic texts


 SS AS     Amano Shizuo, Sonshi, Goshi (Meiji Shoin, Tokyo, 1972).

 SS AY     Asano Yuichi, Sonshi (Kodansha, Tokyo, 1986).

 SS HT     Hosokawa Toshikazu, Sonshi, Goshi (Gakken kenkyūsha,
           Tokyo, 1982).

 SS NT     Nakatani Takao, Sonshi (Kyoikusha, Tokyo, 1987).

 SS TY     Tadokoro Yoshiyuki, Sonshi (Meitoku shuppansha, Tokyo,
           1970).

 ST        Wei Ju-lin, Sun-tzu chin-chu chin-i (Shang-wu yin-shu-
 CCCY      kuan, Taipei, 1972).

 ST SCC    Sun-tzu shih-chieh-chueh (Shih-chieh shu-chü, Taipei,
           1984).

 ST        Sun-tzu in Ch’ung-k’an Wu-ching hui-chieh (Chung-chou
 WCHC      ku-chi ch’u-pan-she, Cheng-chou, 1989).

 STPF      Wu Ju-sung, Sun-tzu ping-fa ch’ien-shuo (Chieh-fang-chün
 CS        ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1983).

 STPF      Chün-k’o-yüan chan-cheng li-cheng-pu, ed., Sun-tzu ping-
 HC        fa hsin-chu (Chung-hua shu-chü, Peking, 1981).

 STPF      Chu Chün, Sun-tzu ping-fa shih-i (Hai-ch’ao ch’u-pan-she,
 SY        Peking, 1980).

 STPF      Wei Ju-lin, Sun-tzu ping-fa ta-ch’uan (Li-ming, Taipei,
 TC        1970).

 STPF      Wang Chien-tung, Sun-tzu ping-fa (Chih-yang ch’u-pan-
 WC         she, Taipei, 1989).

 SWTCC      Sun Wu-tzu chih-chieh, in Ming-pen Wu-ching Ch’i-shu
 WCCS       chih- chieh, vol. 1 (Shih-ti chiao-yü ch’u-pan-she, Taipei,
            1972).

 WYCC       Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu, SPKY ed. (Shih-chieh shu-chü,
            Taipei, 1967).


1 During the T’ang dynasty—and perhaps much earlier—numerous
editions of the Art of War (and other military writings) were introduced
into Japan along with other books and aspects of Chinese culture and
religion. Apparently the book was widely studied, and influenced several
notable figures. The most accessible brief history of the text and its
influence in Japan is found appended to Griffith’s translation of the Art
of War cited in note 3, below, pp. 169-78. Several articles have also
appeared in the collected volume Sun-tzu hsin-t’an—Chung-wai hsüeh-
che lun Sun-tzu, ed. Ch’en Chi-k’ang (Chieh-fang-chün ch’u-pan-she,
Peking, 1990): “Sun-tzu ping-fa tsai jih-pen-te ch’uan-po yüan-liu chi i-
pu kupen Sun-tzu ping-fa te tsai-fa-hsien” (by Kao Tien-fang, Ch’en
P’eng, and Wang Yen-yü), pp. 338-51, and “Ch’ien-t’an Sun-tzu ping-fa
tsai jih-pen li-tai chan-cheng, ch’ing-pao kung-tso-chung te tung-yung”
(by Chou Hong-chin and Yü Ch’üan-ting), pp. 352-58.
   Over the centuries there have been numerous Japanese translations of
varying quality, including both scholarly renditions and extremely
simplified popular editions—even comic-book versions—in this century.
Many popularly oriented works adapting and exploiting Sun-tzu’s
thoughts in remarkably diverse human endeavours have also appeared.
The more serious select and discuss important principles for guiding
action and behavior in human relations and business; multivolume audio-
cassette versions have even been prepared for self-study while
commuting or driving. While numerous Japanese translations and
derivative publications have been consulted for our translation, they will
be noted only where differing significantly from the traditional Chinese
commentary to the text.
2 Lionel Giles, trans., Sun-tzu on the Art of War (Luzac and Co., London,
1910).
3 Samuel B. Griffith, The Art of War (Oxford University Press, London,
1963). Griffith also supplements the translated text with selected
materials from the most important traditional commentaries.
4 For example, Thomas Cleary’s The Art of War (Shambala Publications,
Boston, 1988). The introduction contains a discussion of the Art of War
as a Taoist book, and the translation incorporates extensive quotations
from the commentaries.
5 For example, see Li Ling in Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, pp. 1614-17; Ch’i
Ssu-ho in Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, pp. 1598-99; and Chang Hsin-ch’eng,
Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, vol. 2, pp. 797-800. The absence of Sun Wu’s name
and accomplishments in the Tso chuan, well noted for portraying Wu’s
events in comparative detail, is often considered fatal to any claim of
historicity. However, a few scholars argue that many persons and events
pivotal to the history of various minor states went unrecorded, so in this
regard Sun-tzu should not be considered remarkable. (For further
discussion, see the section at the end of the introduction on the question
of Sun-tzu’s existence.)
   For its realistic approach (employing spies and deception) designed to
ensure the state’s survival, the Art of War was also vehemently
condemned by Confucian literati throughout late Chinese history, as well
as by numerous Westerners early in this century. (They unfortunately
displayed the same attitude as Secretary of State Stimson in his
unimaginable quashing of code-breaking activities in a hostile world.)
Sun Wu’s existence and role, as well as the book itself, were accordingly
viewed as late fabrications, unworthy of consideration except by the
morally reprehensible.
6 Sun Wu and Sun Pin’s connected biographies in the Shih chi, chüan 65,
are translated by Griffith in his introduction (The Art of War, pp. 57-62)
and may also be found in most other translations.
7 Wu Tzu-hsü, largely credited with the major role in Wu’s ascendancy,
became the subject of a popular cult and numerous stories because of his
achievements and perverse execution. (See David Johnson, “The Wu
Tzu-hsü Pien-wen and Its Sources,” HJAS 40.1, [June 1980]: pp. 93-156;
[December 1980]: HJAS 40.2, pp. 465-505.) The fact that Sun-tzu is not
mentioned in the Tso chuan is sometimes justified by pointing out that
Wu Tzu-hsü was such a dominant figure, as well as Sun-tzu’s direct
superior, that he simply eclipsed Sun-tzu when credit for Wu’s military
success was apportioned. (Cf. Wei Ju-lin, ST CCCY, p. 5.) His biography
is translated and analyzed in our introduction.
8 In Sun-tzu’s Shih chi biography, Po P’i is referred to as Po Hsi. (The
character for hsi appears on the left side of p’i, and therefore the Shih chi
version would seem to have picked up an abbreviated writing.) However,
as most of the other writings that will be excerpted for analysis call him
“Po P’i,” for convenience Po P’i will be used throughout. All other
important people will be treated similarly.
9 According to most writings, Sun Wu was a native of Ch’i, as will be
discussed in the introduction. Chao Yeh either had conclusive evidence
available to him, or lacked a basis for attributing his origins to another
state.
10 Ch’i Ssu-ho, among others, doesn’t believe Sun-tzu would have ever
been allowed to commandeer palace women to illustrate his theories of
military discipline, nor that the execution of the two captains would have
been understood as proving anything. He therefore views the entire
episode as an exaggeration. (See Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, p. 1598.) Wu
Ju-sung believes the incident illustrates Sun-tzu’s fundamental teaching
that a general, once in command of the army, does not accept orders
from the ruler, rather than any lesson about discipline, in accord with his
particular understanding of Sun-tzu’s major contribution being the
isolation and characterization of the professional general. (STPF CS, p.
3. Also see the discussion on Sun-tzu and the text later in the
introduction.)
11 This and similarly worded phrases appear frequently in the Seven
Military Classics, as well as in the Art of War. Essentially a quotation
from the Tao Te Ching, it is generally taken as evidence of Taoist
influence upon military thought. However, perhaps this single saying
was simply adopted by various military strategists because of their
sobering experience in actual warfare, without reference to, or
acceptance of, any other aspects of philosophical Taoism.
12 Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu, chüan 4, “Ho-lü nei-chuan.” (The translation
follows the SPKY edition reprinted as Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu [hereafter
WYCC] [Shih-chieh shu-chü, Taipei, 1967], vol. 1, pp. 31-33A.) The
biography continues with an important passage in which Sun-tzu advises
the king not to press further attacks against Ch’u because the people are
already exhausted. While his name is mentioned several more times in
the chapter, except in a single case where he briefly offers tactical
advice, it is always coupled with Wu Tzu-hsü. Insofar as the Wu Yüeh
ch’un-ch’iu is attributed to the first century A.D., nearly two centuries
after the Shih chi, it is not considered reliable evidence for Sun-tzu’s
activities. However, recent PRC popular military histories frequently
contain biographies of Sun-tzu based upon such remote material
(including many late Warring States and Ch’in period writings),
reconstructed in some detail. For example, see Ch’en Wu-t’ung and Su
Shuang-pi, Chung-kuo li-tai ming-chiang, 2 vols. (Honan jen-min ch’u-
pan-she, Honan, 1987), vol. 1, pp. 13-18. Virtually every modern edition
and translation cites the Shih chi biography and assumes Sun-tzu’s
authenticity, although the Chung-kuo ku-tai chan-cheng t’ung-chien
(Ch’angcheng ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1988), pp. 74-81, never even
mentions his name in the account of the war between Wu and Yüeh.
13 Sun-tzu’s origins will be discussed at the end of the introduction in
the section on the question of Sun-tzu’s existence.
14 The monumental issue of the relationship between Taoist and military
thought in antiquity, including questions of origins, modification of
concepts, and direction of influence, obviously requires a voluminous
study in itself. Many secondary works in Chinese contain at least brief
ruminations on the subject, but almost all of them tend to treat it
simplistically and ineffectually. (Hsü Wen-chu’s chapter entitled “Sun-
tzu ho Lao-tzu ssu-hsiang pi-chiao,” found in his book Sun-tzu yen-chiu
[Kuang-tung ch’u-pan-she, Taipei, 1980], pp. 192-208, is an exception.)
In the West, Christopher Rand has initiated the analytical effort with an
intriguing, if complex article providing a conceptual framework for
dissecting the various approaches to certain felt problems. (See “Chinese
Military Thought and Philosophical Taoism,” Monumenta Serica 34
[1979-80]: 171-218, and “Li Ch’üan and Chinese Military Thought,”
HJAS 39.1 [June, 1979]: 107-37.) Insofar as it is impossible to compress
a meaningful, comparative presentation of Taoist ideas and military
thought into a few pages of closely packed footnotes, we have opted to
introduce appropriate comments at relevant points in the translation and
introductory material. (Ch’en Ch’i-t’ien’s Sun-tzu ping-fa chiao-shih
[Chung-hua shu-chü, Taipei, 1955; reprint of 1944 ed.] contains a
succinct analysis of the major philosophical schools’ attitudes toward
warfare that corrects some general misimpressions found throughout
Chinese history. [See pp. 231-51.] Kagakuraoka Masatoshi’s article
“Sonshi to Roshi” [Toho shukyo 37 (April, 1971): 39-50] is among the
earliest focusing on this issue.)
15 WYCC, vol. 1, p. 46A.
16 Based upon the Shih chi account, Wu Ju-sung believes the historical
Sun-tzu was active in Wu, despite intrigues and treachery, for roughly
thirty years, from 512 to 482 B.C. (See STPF CS, p. 4.) Chan Li-po
suggests a more limited period, 512 to 496. (“Lüeh-t’an Lin-i Han-mu
chu-chien Sun-tzu ping-fa,” WW 1974: 12, p. 15.)
17 Tung-Chou lieh-kuo-chih (Shih-chieh shu-chü, Taipei, 1973), vol. 3,
chapter 77, pp. 720-21.
18 For a discussion of the Early Chou and such campaigns, see Herrlee
G. Creel, The Origins of Statecraft in China (University of Chicago
Press, 1970), pp. 233 ff.
19 Wu apparently launched the first seaborne invasion in Chinese
history, attacking Ch’i in 485 B.C. (See Chang Ch’i-yün, Chung-hua wu-
ch’ien-nien shih [hereafter Wu-ch’ien-nien shih] [Chung-kuo Wen-hua
Ta-hsüeh, Taipei, 1961], vol. 3, p. 88.)
20 For a discussion, see the section of “swords” at the end of the general
introduction.
21 Including many small states that claimed royal Chou ancestors. (See
Sanchün Ta-hsüeh, Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih [hereafter
abbreviated by title] [Li-ming wen-hua, Taipei], vol. 2, p. 6, and Wu-
ch’ien-nien shih, vol. 3, p. 71.) Creel attributes the origination of the
hsien (district) system to Ch’u, particularly as it would have facilitated
imposing central government administration on annexed territory. (See
Herrlee G. Creel, “The Beginnings of Bureaucracy in China: The Origins
of the Hsien,” Journal of Asian Studies 23 (1964): 155-84.)
22 For a translation of the Tso chuan accounts of the battle of Ch’eng-
p’u, see Watson, The Tso chuan (hereafter Tso chuan) (Columbia
University Press, New York, 1989), pp. 50-64. The battle is also
discussed by Frank Kierman in Chinese Ways in Warfare, ed. Frank A.
Kierman and John K. Fairbank (Harvard University Press, 1974), pp. 47-
56, and in Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 1, pp. 171-78.
23 The duke of Shen was among the many nobles and ministers felled by
amorous desires, in this case coming into conflict with the ruler. Ch’u’s
losses were turned to great advantage by both Wu and Yüeh.
24 As Wan Chiu-ho points out, in 584 B.C. the year preceding the duke’s
visit, Wu mounted a campaign that traveled a thousand li and attacked
the minor state of T’an, defeating it. Wu’s growing power inevitably
nominated it as a plausible candidate to counter Ch’u’s threats. See Wan
Chiu-ho, “Po-chü-chih-chan yü Huang-ch’ih-chih-hui,” Hsien-ch’in,
Ch’in-Han-shih fu-k’an, 1992: 8, p. 56.
25 See the general introduction for the history and problems of chariot
employment.
26 King T’ai is also known as Tan Fu (Tan-fu), the Ancient Duke already
encountered in the general introduction as the progenitor of the Chou
dynasty. T’aipo, his son, supposedly went to the barbarian area of Wu to
avoid ascending the throne. Since King Wu established the Chou when
he defeated the Shang and was descended from T’ai-po’s younger
brother, in theory the Chou had to be ritually deferential to the state of
Wu. See WYCC, chüan 1, 1:1-5; Shih chi, chüan 31 (“The Hereditary
House of Wu T’ai-po”); and Chang Ch’i-yün, Wu-ch’ien-nien shih, vol.
3, p. 82.
27 Chang Ch’i-yün suggests short hair was necessary for people
constantly in water, while their tattooes were designed to frighten water
creatures. See Wuch’ien-nien shih, vol. 3, p. 82.
28 Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2, pp. 8-14.
29 Ibid., p. 14.
30 Ibid., pp. 5-6, 9-18.
31 Ibid., p. 18. Floating downstream to engage an enemy obviously
requires far less energy than mounting a campaign against the current.
Consequently, Ch’u’s forces should have been both rested and more
numerous (considering that their journey would be much faster, and
fewer supplies would have to be carried). The comparative advantage of
engaging from a downstream position, or arrayed along the bank, would
seem to be a question of tactics plus the strength of the current.
32 Nurturing the people and eliminating evil are fundamental domestic
policies advocated in many of the Seven Military Classics, including the
Six Secret Teachings, and such philosophical works as Mencius and the
Lü-shih ch’un-ch’iu. Conducting punitive expeditions against those who
brutalize and exhaust their people and who indulge in extravagance and
licentiousness was morally sanctioned from the Chou’s conquest of the
Shang onward, as previously discussed.
33 Chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.”
34 Chapter 8, “Nine Changes.”
35 Chapter 6, “Vacuity and Substance.”
36 Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2, pp. 21-23. In Sun-tzu’s era
omens and magical thought still retained the power to frighten the troops
and depress their morale. The later military classics, including the Wu-tzu
(in which Wu Ch’i describes conditions in which an attack can be made
without divining about the prospects), generally warn against allowing
baleful influences in camp, and many specifically deny the potency of
signs, omens, and indications. Sun-tzu mentions that prior knowledge
can not be gained through divination and interpreting signs, but only
through spies (chapter 13, “Employing Spies”), but otherwise is silent.
However, an enemy perturbed and dispirited provides an opportunity to
exploit a weakness in their ch’i, in accord with Sun-tzu’s principles.
37 Military activities being associated with yin—the dark, negative—a
moonless night signified yin proceeding to its extremity. Since extremes
are inherently unstable, and the cycle is about to revert, with yang
beginning to ascend as the new moon makes its appearance, military
affairs would be extremely risky, unpredictable, and probably fated to
failure.
38 “Wu Tzu-hsü lieh-chuan,” chüan 66, the Shih chi. The translation is
based upon Ma T’e-ying, Shih chi chin-chu (Shang-wu yin-shu-kuan,
Taipei, 1979), vol. 4, pp. 2213-22. The biography is also included in
Burton Watson’s Records of the Historian: Chapters from the Shih chi of
Ssu-ma Ch’ien (Columbia University Press, New York, 1969), pp. 16-29,
and has previously been translated by R. C. Rudolph (“The Shih chi
biography of Wu Tzu-hsü,” Oriens Extremus 9 (1962): 105-20.)
39 The “woman of Ch’in” was a royal princess, the ruler’s younger
sister. The marriage was no doubt designed to establish or secure some
minimal relationship between the two “barbarian” states on either side of
Ch’u.
40 Ts’ai was a small state originally north of Ch’u, later annexed by
them. It had a strong martial tradition, and the ruler’s support figured
prominently in the victorious invasion by which Wu reached Ch’u’s
capital of Ying.
41 “Great affairs” normally refer to revolutionary acts—in particular, the
ousting of a debauched and oppressed ruler.
42 The text obviously suffers from disruptions that the Grand Historian
did not resolve. “Each escaped alone” is interpolated.
43 In later versions of the story, the boatman commits suicide by
drowning himself so as to forever preserve Wu’s secret.
44 Other versions describe an encounter with a peasant woman who
provides him with food and then drowns herself as well.
45 Chuan Chu, who had concealed the murder weapon—a dagger—in a
fish, thereby immediately established his name for all time. His story is
preserved in the Shih chi collective biography “The Assassins.”
46 Po P’i apparently benefited from Wu Tzu-hsü’s aid because Wu,
blinded by his desire for revenge against Ch’u, apparently misread Po’s
character. (WYCC, vol. 1, pp. 15b-17a.) Hsi Yüan was Po Chou-li’s son.
47 Both rulers, as will be discussed later, had been detained by Nang Wa
for refusing to cater to his desires.
48 See the discussion that follows later in the introduction for a
quotation.
49 This was essentially an appeal for solidarity among the descendants
of the Chi and Chiang clans—the royal families of the Chou—who had
emigrated centuries ago to nominally establish numerous minor Chou
states along the Han River. Wu claims that Ch’u had destroyed all of
them.
50 This event, whether actual or not, is generally dated to 500 B.C.
51 Or possibly his finger. (The translation of “toe” follows Tu Yü’s
commentary to the Tso chuan. Under Duke Ting’s fourteenth year, in
recounting the battle between Wu and Yüeh, the Tso chuan states “Ling
Ku-fu attacked Ho-lü with a halberd. He injured Ho-lü’s toe and got his
shoe.” Tu notes that Ho-lü’s big toe was severed, and Yang adds that the
term for big toe, chiang chih, also meant “middle finger” in antiquity.
Since chih, the word found in the Shih chi biography, can mean either toe
or finger, other translations often employ “finger.” See Yang Po-chün,
Ch’un-ch’iu Tso-chuan-chu (Chung-hua shu-chü, Peking, 1990), vol. 4,
p. 1596.
52 The Announcement appears in the Shu ching, better known as the
Book of Documents. For the context, see Legge’s classic translation: The
Shoo King, The Chinese Classics, vol. 3, book 7, “Pwan-kang.”
53 Another example of Wu Tzu-hsü’s failure to evaluate men properly.
Even King Ho-lü is quoted as saying that “Fu-ch’ai is stupid and not
benevolent.” (See WYCC, vol. 1, pp. 44B-46B.)
54 While much of the Shih chi follows the Tso chuan closely, other parts
are clearly based upon different sources and materials. The degree to
which his source materials may have been altered and embellished, or
even “creatively supplemented,” over time is difficult to determine.
Because only a brief space is devoted to most people, they tend to have
an archetypal cast and be characterized by just a few phrases. However,
officials such as Fei Wu-chi—who destroyed men and even forged the
king’s orders—hardly need more development.
55 See note 23, above.
56 Especially in such military classics as the Six Secret Teachings and
the Three Strategies.
57 See chapter 15, “Civil Offensive,” T’ai Kung’s Six Secret Teachings in
The Seven Military Classics of Ancient China, pp. 56-57.
58 In chapter 7, “Military Combat,” Sun-tzu states: “When you plunder a
district, divide the wealth among your troops. When you enlarge your
territory, divide the profits.” Common practice was of course to seize
whatever was mobile; the later military classics stress not harming local
inhabitants, destroying fields and buildings, or seizing the enemy’s
wealth as part of their psychological doctrine and good moral practice.
59 Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2, p. 41.
60 The Tso chuan, Duke Chao, thirtieth year.
61 Chapter 7, “Military Combat.”
62 The system of five made the Squad of five, including its leader, the
basic organizational unit. While methods for employing the Squad of
five are found in most of the military writings, one of the clearest
expositions, with the rules and regulations, is found in chapters 14 and
16 of the Wei Liao-tzu, entitled “Orders for the Squad of Five” and
“Orders for Binding the Squad of Five.” (See Seven Military Classics,
pp. 263-65, and the section on military organization in the introduction.
Lord Shang’s exposition on employing the unit of five is found in his
chapter “Within the Borders.” For a translation see J. J. L. Duyvendak,
The Book of Lord Shang (University of Chicago Press, 1963; reprint of
original edition, 1928), pp. 294-303.
63 Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2, p. 34. The number of
chariots associated with the army is unclear. In the Tso chuan record of
the campaign to Ying, one of Nang Wa’s advisers urges quick action
because Ch’u’s chariots, partially employing leather, could not withstand
the moisture of the river area, whereas those of Wu could (See Tso
chuan, Duke Ting, fourth year.) It is unlikely they would have been
ferried up the Huai River, although the southern force probably
employed them to a greater degree.
64 The ideal commander was thought to be a man who, eschewing the
privileges of rank, shared hardships and the travails of ordinary military
life with his men. Such behavior bonded his troops to him, and also
allowed him to know their limits and endurance. Wu Ch’i, as portrayed
in his biography in the Shih chi, exemplified the true genereral, and
descriptions much in his mold are found in several of the military
classics.
65 Duke Chao of Ts’ai had presented a fur garment and a jade pendant to
the ruler, keeping similar ones for himself. Duke Ch’eng of T’ang had
arrived with two unusual horses. In both cases they refused to relinquish
them to Nang Wa, thereby incurring his enmity. While the incident is
recorded in the Tso chuan (Duke Ting, third year), it is also recounted by
Sun-tzu and Wu Tzu-hsü when explaining to King Ho-lü why Ch’u had
become vulnerable (WYCC, vol. 1, pp. 37-38).
66 Chin, which headed the alliance of numerous northern states, was
actually afraid to initiate military action against Ch’u, and in the end no
real coercive pressure was applied apart from the specter of a threatening
alliance. According to the Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu, their release was due to
the rulers’ ministers presenting alternative gifts sufficiently dazzling that
Nang Wa released them (WYCC, vol. 1, pp. 37B-38).
67 Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2, p. 32.
68 Chapter 6, “Vacuity and Substance.”
69 The summaries and analyses found in two works are particularly
useful for studying this campaign: Ch’ang Ch’i-yün’s Chung-hua Wu-
ch’ien-nien shih (Chung-kuo Wen-hua Ta-hsüeh, Taipei, 1963), vol. 3, p.
87, and that by the Armed Forces University, Chung-kuo li-tai chan-
cheng-shih, vol. 2, pp. 29-50. Wan Chiuho’s article “Po-chü-chih-chan
yü Huang-ch’ih-chih-hui,” Hsien-Ch’in, Ch’in-Han-shih fu-k’an 1992: 8,
pp. 56-62, also contains a similar analysis. Material relating to the battles
is translated by Burton Watson in the Tso chuan, pp. 180-90.
70 See Tso chuan, Duke Ting, fourth year.
71 Chapter 11, “Nine Terrains.” Naturally the wise general can also
exploit this tendency in his men, and in the same chapter Sun-tzu
advocates casting them onto fatal ground to attain their maximum effort:
“Cast them into hopeless situations and they will be preserved; have
them penetrate fatal terrain and they will live.”
72 Tso chuan, Duke Ting, fifth year.
73 Ibid. He is quoted somewhat differently in the Shih chi (chüan 31,
“The Hereditary House of T’ai-po of Wu”), where Fu-kai exclaims: “The
king has already subordinated the army to me. The army takes advantage
to be foremost, so how can I wait!”
74 Chapter 10, “Configurations of Terrain.”
75 Chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.”
76 Cf. Chang Ch’i-yün, Chung-hua wu-ch’ien-nien-shih, vol. 3, p. 87.
77 The title of king is anachronistic because he had not yet returned to
Wu to usurp the throne. That it was not corrected by the original
recorders is puzzling.
78 The Tso chuan, Duke Ting, fourth year.
79 Chapter 11, “Nine Terrains.”
80 Chapter 7, “Military Combat.”
81 Chapter 9, “Maneuvering the Army.”
82 Chapter 11, “Nine Terrains.”
83 Chapter 7, “Military Combat.” (Also see the notes to the translation.)
84 Chapter 2, “Waging War.”
85 Chapter 7, “Military Combat.”
86 Chapter 7, “Military Combat.” (Also found in chapter 11, “Nine
Terrains.”)
87 In addition to the accounts found in the Tso chuan, Wu Yüeh ch’un-
ch’iu, and Shih chi (such as “The Hereditary House of Kou-chien, King
of Yüeh”), the discussion that follows is also based on Chung-kuo li-tai
chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2., pp. 52-76; Wu-ch’ien-nien shih, vol. 3, pp. 89-
92, 94-104; and Wan Chiu-ho, “Po-chü-chih-chan yü Huang-ch’ih-chih-
hui,” Hsien-Ch’in, Ch’in-Han-shih fuk’an, 1992: 8, pp. 59-61.
88 Apparently King Fu-ch’ai became so enthralled with the women of
Yüeh that Po P’i was virtually able to mesmerize him into dooming
himself and his state. Beautiful women were used throughout the period
as an offensive weapon, generally to befuddle a ruler or gain power over
a minister. Apart from any question of moralizing, licentiousness and
effective rule were known to be mutually incompatible. Many examples
of the tactical exploitation of beautiful women may be found in the Seven
Military Classics.
89 Chapter 12, “Incendiary Attacks.” On the other hand, arguments that
a benevolent ruler extends mercy to his enemies were well known,
although increasingly ignored with the passage of time, and proved a
formidable obstacle to Wu Tzu-hsü.
90 Exactly in the manner prescribed by the T’ai Kung in chapter 15 of
the Six Secret Teachings.
91 In chapter 1, “Initial Estimations,” Sun-tzu said: “Be deferential to
foster their arrogance.” In order to weaken his enemy, King Kou-chien
encouraged them to undertake massive, distant campaigns, just as Sun-
tzu advised.
92 Chung-kuo li-tai chan-cheng-shih, vol. 2, pp. 66-68.
93 Chapter 6, “Vacuity and Substance.” Also see chapter 6 in general on
the methods for manipulating men and attaining the objective of
“compelling others.”
94 Chapter 6, “Vacuity and Substance.”
95 Ibid.
96 Just as the Chou had allowed the state of Shang to retain the small fief
of Sung, to perpetuate their sacrifices to their ancestors.
97 Chapter 1, “Initial Estimations.”
98 The Art of War is classified by the Han shu under the subcategory of
“ping ch’üan mou,” roughly “military (imbalance of) power and
planning.” (See note 125 below for a brief discussion of ch’üan; shih,
with which it is closely related, is analyzed later in the introduction and
in note 158.) Ch’üan is frequently identified with expediency, with
military measures that stress volatile tactics, swiftness, and indirection to
achieve their aims. Books in this category are aptly described as follows:
“[Experts in] ch’üan and mou preserve the state with the orthodox
(cheng, the upright), and employ the army with the unorthodox (ch’i).
Only after first estimating [the prospects for victory] do they engage in
warfare. They unite the disposition of troops (hsing) and strategic power
(shih), embrace yin and yang, and utilize [those skilled in] technology
and the crafts.” Other works included in this section are Sun Pin’s
Military Methods and the Wu-tzu, books by Lord Shang and the T’ai
Kung having been deleted from the original Ch’i lüeh listing. (Cf. Robin
D. S. Yates, “New Light on Ancient Chinese Military Texts: Notes on
their Nature and Evolution, and the Development of Military
Specialization in Warring States China, “T’oung Pao 74 [1988]: 214-24.)
99 The bamboo-slip edition discovered at Lin-i comprises slightly more
than one third of the present Art of War, arranged in thirteen sections
with many chapter headings identical to those in the current text. While
some discrepancies in extant traditional versions (such as found in the
Ten Commentaries edition and the Seven Military Classics edition) have
long been noted, they are essentially the same as—although of course
more extensive than—the Lin-i reconstructed text. Additional material
uncovered in the tomb, including a brief conversation recorded between
the king of Wu and Sun-tzu (generally felt to be a reasonably authentic
record of their initial interview) perhaps sustains the opinion that the
original form of the Art of War was thirteen sections, as recorded in the
Shih chi, and suggests that Ssu-ma Ch’ien employed materials now lost
when writing the Suns’ biography. (The bamboo-slip edition, of course,
only proves that this particular version existed prior to, or at least early
in, the Han dynasty. Scholars continue to argue about the further
implications, including whether the section now entitled “King of Wu’s
Questions” provides evidence for Sun Wu’s existence and the early
origin of the text, as will be discussed in our introductory section on the
question of Sun-tzu’s existence.) For a brief English overview, see Robin
Yates, “New Light,” pp. 211-20.
   Among the most important original reports on the excavation and
contents of this tomb, including the recovered texts, are the following:
“Shantung Lin-i Hsi-Han-mu fa-hsien Sun-tzu ping fa ho Sun Pin ping-fa
teng chu-chien te chienpao,” WW 1974: 2, pp. 15-21; Hsü Ti, “Lüeh-t’an
Lin-i Yin-chüeh-shan Han-mu ch’u-t’u te ku-tai ping-shu ts’an-chien,”
WW 1974: 2, pp. 27-31; Lo Fu-i, “Lin-i Han-chien kai-shu,” WW 1974:
2, pp. 32-35 and Chan Li-po, “Lüeh-t’an Lin-i Han-mu chu-chien Sun-
tzu ping-fa,” WW 1974: 12, pp. 13-19. (Chan Li-po points out several
instances in which the bamboo-slip edition’s reading is completely
opposite the present text. In some sentences this radically alters the
meaning, resolving otherwise contorted and opaque constructions. These
will be cited in the notes to the translation, together with other views,
such as those of Chu Chün.) Also see Li Ling’s summary reprinted in
Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-kao, pp. 1605-08.
100 Wu Ju-sung emphasizes Sun-tzu’s dictum that warfare is the greatest
affair of state, as distinguished from the Shang-Chou tradition
identifying both sacrifice and warfare as the sole important matters. Wu
feels that Sun-tzu’s view reflects the new reality emerging late in the
Spring and Autumn period, and the clash of economic interests between
the newly landed class and the old nobility that had monopolized
military power and authority. (See STPF CS, pp. 9-12.)
101 Chapter 1, “Initial Estimations.”
102 The Art of War, while expressing the basic view found throughout
the Seven Military Classics that the state must always be prepared for
warfare and nurture adequate material welfare, advocates keeping the
people essentially ignorant and manipulating them in battle like sheep.
Accordingly, some scholars (particularly in the PRC) have concluded
that the author lived after the rise of early Legalist thought—such
measures being characteristic of that approach—and even termed him a
Legalist strategist. See, for example: Tsun Hsin, “Sun-tzu ping-fa te tso-
che chi ch’i shih-tai,” WW 1974: 12, pp. 22-24; Ch’i Ssu-ho in Hsü Wei-
shu t’ung-k’ao, p. 1603; Li Ling in Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, p. 1613; and
Chan Li-po, “Lüeh-t’an Lin-i Han-mu chu-chien Sun-tzu ping-fa,” WW
1974: 12, pp. 14-15. Keeping the people simple and ignorant is also a
pronounced doctrine in the Tao Te Ching. However, see the translation
notes to chapter 11.
103 See the discussion on sieges in the last section of the introduction
where the question of internal evidence for dating the text is raised. Also
note the inclusion of tomb text material on cities in the chapter entitled
“Nine Changes” in the translation.
104 Chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.”
105 See the notes to the translation for a discussion of these objectives.
The late Spring and Autumn period, marking the transition from limited-
scale, somewhat formal warfare (with reputedly general adherence to
codes of behavior) to the unlimited carnage and brutality of the Warring
States period, was supposedly still affected by doctrines of humane
conduct. That is, some thinkers felt that campaigns that deliberately
minimize the damage and suffering inflicted upon the enemy would not
only be more in accord with concepts of virtue (and the casting out of the
evil), but also lessen the enemy’s opposition and undermine his will to
fight. In contrast, as Sun-tzu noted, brutal attacks would force the enemy
to mount a pitched defense, knowing that they would all perish if
vanquished. Less intense opposition would invariably result in fewer
losses for one’s own side. It is, of course, always possible that this policy
reflected a deliberate reaction to the carnage of the later period, such as
the Three Strategies perhaps does. Barbarian armies were identified with
the opposite policy of striking terror in those under attack: failing to
surrender early on would result in total annihilation.
106 Chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.”
107 The final paragraph of the chapter summarizes the role and
importance of the process: “Before the engagement, one who determines
in the ancestral temple that he will be victorious has found that the
majority of factors are in his favor. Before the engagement one who
determines in the ancestral temple that he will not be victorious has
found few factors are in his favor.”
108 Sun-tzu’s materialistic concept of Heaven, and his opposition to
consulting omens, are seen by Wu Ju-sung as evidence of a new attitude
and approach, in contradistinction with the old concepts held by the
Chou nobility and the earlier Shang. (See STPF CS, p. 18.) However,
yin-yang and such other concepts as five-phase theory, which also appear
in the Art of War, thereafter developed into an influential school of
thought, apparently affecting military theory and even command
practices, although being condemned in such other Seven Military
Classics as the Six Secret Teachings and the Wei Liao-tzu.
109 Cf. D. C. Lau, “Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” BSOAS 28 (1965):
331-32, and Hsü Wen-chu, Sun-tzu yen-chiu (Kuang-tung ch’u-pan-she,
Taipei, 1980), pp. 168-69.
110 Although Sun-tzu’s biography suggests training should be one of his
strong points, unlike in the later military writings there is no mention of
methods for training and instruction. However, he observes that disorder
in the troops, as well as rebellious troops whose general applied
punishment before they had become emotionally attached, would
provide opportunities to be exploited. (The subject of military training is
focused upon in such chapters as “Teaching Combat” [Six Secret
Teachings]; “Controlling the Army” [Wu-tzu]; “Orders for Restraining
the Troops” [Wei Liao-tzu]; and Book II of Questions and Replies.)
111 Although Sun-tzu offers little commentary, the systematic
implementaton of rewards and punishments, as well as their psychology,
is the focus of much discussion in the later writings. For example, see
“Rewards and Punishments” and “The General’s Awesomeness” in the
Six Secret Teachings, and numerous chapters in the Wei Liao-tzu.
112 Altogether some eight factors (counting advantages of Heaven and
Earth separately) should have relative estimates assigned to them. No
doubt some comparative weighting system had to be employed because
advantages of Earth might have been deemed more important than force
strength. Some of these factors are detailed in the text.
113 See T’an Ching-wu, Sun-tzu ping-fa tsui-hsin-chieh, (self-published,
Taipei, 1981; rev. ed.), pp. 25-27 for an extensive list.
114 Heaven is usually interpreted as encompassing climate, the seasons,
and weather. Earth, discussed further in the introduction, includes
advantages of terrain (such as favorable position, or ability to take
advantage of ravines or trap an enemy in a valley), a secure water supply,
grass, freedom from dampness, and similar factors.
115 Sun-tzu’s discussion of the general’s critical qualities is viewed as
evidence that professional commanders had already appeared on the
historical stage, displacing personal field command by hereditary rulers.
(Cf. STPF SY, p. 12.) Further confirmation is provided by his insistence
that the ruler should not interfere with the commander once the latter has
assumed the mantle of authority and ventured forth, as illustrated by the
famous incident from his biography, and the origin of such problems
(discussed in chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.”)
116 Chapter 12, “Incendiary Attacks.”
117 Chapter 4, “Military Disposition.”
118 Sun-tzu also said: “Those that the ancients referred to as excelling at
warfare conquered those who were easy to conquer. Thus the victories of
those that excelled in warfare were not marked by fame for wisdom or
courageous achievement. Thus their victories were free from errors. One
who is free from errors directs his measures toward [certain] victory,
conquering those who are already defeated.”
119 Some generals no doubt felt invincible, others that they had no
alternative but to fight given their likely condemnation by an impatient
ruler. One of the ten errors that mark generals in the Six Secret Teachings
is “being hasty and impatient.” (See chapter 19, “A Discussion of
Generals.”)
120 See the general introduction for a discussion of the shift in command
from ruler to professional general.
121 In the tomb text it also appears first; however, all the following
characters have been lost.
122 Many of the other military writings stress that wisdom—embracing
not only basic mental acuity but also tactical planning and analytical
skills, knowledge, and the ability to abstract lessons from experience—
outweighs courage in importance. The general must be courageous, but
courage does not predominate. The dangers of courage untempered by
other qualities, including wisdom, were much remarked upon in most of
the Seven Military Classics. For example, in “A Discussion of Generals”
(Six Secret Teachings) five talents are identified: “What we refer to as the
five talents are courage, wisdom, benevolence, trustworthiness, and
loyalty. If he is courageous he cannot be overwhelmed. If he is wise he
cannot be forced into turmoil. If he is benevolent he will love his men. If
he is trustworthy he will not be deceitful. If he is loyal he will not be of
two minds.” Among the “ten errors” is “being courageous and treating
death lightly” because “one who is courageous and treats death lightly
can be destroyed by violence.” (Seven Military Classics, p. 62.) Other
lists of vital characteristics are found in the Wu-tzu (chapter 4, “The Tao
of the General”)—awesomeness, virtue, benevolence, and courage; and
the Three Strategies of Huang Shih-kung, Book I—pure, quiet,
controlled, accepts criticism, judges disputes, attracts and employs men,
selects and accepts advice, knows the customs of states, able to map
mountains and rivers, discern defiles and difficulties, and control
military authority. Similarly, he can’t be troubled, greedy, or arrogant.
123 In chapter 8, “Nine Changes,” in remarking upon dangerous traits in
generals, Sun-tzu said: “One who loves the people can be troubled.” The
T’ai Kung mentions “being benevolent but unable to inflict suffering” as
a fatal error in generals because “he can be worn down” (“A Discussion
of Generals,” the Six Secret Teachings.)
124 One such list in the Six Secret Teachings is cited in note 122 above.
A fundamental principle was to attack weakness and flaws in enemy
commanders; Wu Ch’i was particularly noted for probing the enemy to
discover the commander’s ability. See chapter 2 of the Wu-tzu,
“Evaluating the Enemy.”
125 Ch’üan is a difficult term to isolate and precisely define, and the
classical commentators assign a wide range of meanings to it. Virtually
everyone agrees it anciently referred to the “weight of a steelyard,” and
thus meant “to weigh.” (Cf. Kalgren, Grammata Serica Recensa, entry
158/O.) A. C. Graham, for example, with reference to its use in the
Mohist classics, defines it as the “weighing” (of benefit and harm),” and
“‘positional advantage’ used for leverage” (Disputers of the Tao, pp. 145,
157, 209, 164). Duyvendak notes it implies the “deciding influence and
authority” (The Book of Lord Shang, p. 260, note 1). Other translators
assign a wide range of equivalents, such as “power,” “authority,”
“circumstances,” and “expediency.” (See, for example, Rickett, Kuan
Tzu, p. 45, where he notes its closenesss to shih, suggests the translation
of “political power,” and comments that it can also refer to whatever
might be expedient.) The classical Chinese commentators tend to stress
the sense of weighing, of balancing forces, as well as its meaning of
“authority.” However, ch’üan is also set off against cheng—that is, it is
the “expedient” (associated with the exercise of power, particularly
military power) compared with the “upright,” the “orthodox,” or the
“correct,” the measures of proper government and the civil. (See, for
example, T’ao Hsi-hseng, Ping-fa san-shu [Shih-huo ch’u-pan-she,
Taipei, 1979], pp. 5-6.) Its origins are frequently associated with the
philosopher Shen Pu-hai, about whom Herrlee G. Creel has written a
brief monograph: Shen Pu-Hai: A Chinese Political Philosopher of the
Fourth Century B.C. (University of Chicago Press, 1974).
   In some usages, the simple equivalent of “authority” is clearly
adequate; however, in others the term appears to refer to the strategic
imbalance of power, or the strategic advantage obtained from such
imbalance, and will therefore be translated as “strategic (im)balance of
power.” (A discussion on the term “power” follows in the introduction.)
126 Note that Wu Ju-sung believes it is not generally recognized that the
Art of War, just as some Taoist writings, discusses means and methods
for wresting victory with a small force, and fewer numbers. (See STPF
CS, p. 17.)
127 Chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.”
128 Ibid.
129 In chapter 13, “Employing Spies,” Sun-tzu points out the burdens
and suffering imposed on the people by warfare, concluding: “Armies
remain locked in a standoff for years to fight for victory on a single day,
yet [generals] begrudge bestowing ranks and emoluments of one hundred
pieces of gold and therefore do not know the enemy’s situation. This is
the ultimate inhumanity. Such a person is not a general for the people, an
assistant for a ruler, or the arbiter of victory.”
130 This is the justification for employing scouts and local guides, and
otherwise buying or gaining true intelligence of the terrain and its
features.
131 Chapter 10, “Configurations of Terrain.”
132 Employing deceit and being deceptive are constant themes in the
Seven Military Classics, as may immediately be seen from the number of
entries in the index. In addition to advocating their employment on the
battlefield, Questions and Replies also views them as important for
preserving the secrecy of military doctrine. (See Book 1.)
133 Creating a localized imbalance in power (ch’üan).
134 Chapter 13, “Employing Spies.”
135 For example, Books 1 and 2 of the Three Strategies of Huang Shih-
kung; chapter 17, “Three Doubts,” and chapter 26, “The Army’s
Strategic Power,” in the Six Secret Teachings.
136 Chapter 11, “Nine Terrains.” Later in the chapter Sun-tzu adds:
“When you mobilize the army and form strategic plans, you must be
unfathomable.”
137 Chapter 11, “Nine Terrains.” He also said: “At the moment the
general has designated with them, it will be as if they ascended a height
and abandoned their ladders. The general advances with them deep into
the territory of the feudal lords and then releases the trigger. He comands
them as if racing a herd of sheep—they are driven away, driven back, but
no one knows where they are going.”
138 Chapter 5, “Strategic Military Power.” In “Vacuity and Substance,”
he states: “In order to cause the enemy to come of their own volition,
extend some [apparent] profit. In order to prevent the enemy from
coming forth, show them the [potential] harm.”
139 Chapter 6, “Vacuity and Substance.”
140 Virtually the last half of the lengthy Six Secret Teachings—that is,
the Tiger, Leopard, and even much of the Canine Secret Teaching—is
devoted to tactical discussions centered upon various configurations of
terrain and battlefield situations. Whether the Wu-tzu borrowed from the
Art of War or was based upon common military knowledge and Wu
Ch’i’s own observations and experience remains to be determined. The
main discussion is found in chapter 5, “Responding to Change.”
141 Thus the information provided to Wu by minority peoples and such
states as Ts’ai and T’ang proved essential.
142 Chapter 10, “Configurations of Terrain.”
143 The tomb texts include a brief fragment entitled “Configurations of
Terrain, II,” and “Four Changes.” The latter has been incorporated into
our translation; the former is basically worthless.
144 Many of the configurations relate not to specific terrain features but
to the degree an invasion force has penetrated enemy territory.
145 Chapter 9, “Maneuvering the Army.” Similar admonitions are found
in the Six Secret Teachings and Wu-tzu regarding entrapping terrain.
146 Chapter 11, “Nine Terrains.”
147 This is the basis for segmenting and combining, for effecting
battlefield tactics.
148 The military thinkers all understood the difficulty of forcing men to
enter battle and engage in combat, of compelling them to kill other men.
(Sun-tzu observes it is anger that motivates them to do so.) They
identified ch’i as the component whose development and surge made
such actions possible. Sun-tzu was perhaps the first to recognize and
describe the critical role of spirit and courage in battle, although the
other Seven Military Classics and some of the early philosophical
writings consider ways to develop, manipulate, and ensure the proper
combative spirit. Among the philosophers, Mencius is famous for his
cultivation of “overflowing ch’i” (II:A2), although his conception
differed significantly from the military thinkers.
   The definitions, dimensions, and dynamics of ch’i are quite complex,
entailing both metaphysical and psychological aspects. This extremely
important concept still lacks a serious monograph in English, although it
is touched upon in a number of places in Needham’s Science and
Civilisation in China. There are significant works and numerous articles
in Chinese and Japanese, the best of which are Ononzawa Seiichi,
Fukunaga Mitsuji, and Yamanoi Yu, eds., Ki no shisō (Tokyo Daigaku
shuppansha, Tokyo, 1978), and Kuroda Genji, Ki no kenkyū (Tokyo
Bijustsu, Tokyo, 1977).
149 For example, one version states: “Ch’i, Vapor, the ch’i or fumes
rising from fermenting rice; ether, breath, air” (G. D. Wilder and J. H.
Ingram, Analysis of Chinese Characters, 2d ed. (College of Chinese
Studies in China, Shanghai, 1934, p. 18). This is a popular as opposed to
an etymological view, and probably derives from the fragrant vapors
rising from cooking or steaming rice. (The modern character is written
with a component part that means “rice.”) The actual origins are obscure
and a matter of much speculation, looking to observations of natural
phenomena, such as vapors and clouds, for possibilities. The character
seems to have appeared late in the Spring and Autumn, becoming
frequent in the Warring States.
150 In chapters 9 and 10 Sun-tzu notes a number of circumstances in
which disharmony and other problems marking disunity and the loss of
hierarchical order affect the army.
151 The pernicious effects of prolonged campaigns (which exhaust the
people, depress the men’s spirits, and destroy cohesion) were clearly
observed by Sun-tzu, leading to his emphasis upon avoiding them.
152 As previously discussed in connection with Fu-kai’s avoidance of
pressing his foe too fervently during their invasion of Ch’u. This view
also appears in many other writings, including the Ssu-ma Fa (chapter 5,
“Employing Masses”). Conversely, the nature of the general’s task in
nurturing the proper forms of courage and commitment, the ch’i
necessary to fight, was also well understood and prominently discussed.
For example, in chapter 4 of the Ssu-ma Fa (“Strict Positions”) it states:
“When men have minds set on victory, all they see is the enemy. When
men have minds filled with fear, all they see is their fear.” Warriors
oblivious to death would be capable of anything. (The example of how
one man, committed to dying, is able to frighten a thousand in the
marketplace is sometimes cited. For example, see “Discussion of
Regulations” in the Wei Liao-tzu.)
153 Suspended, stalemated, constricted, and precipitous configurations
all entail the potential for defeat. Especially dangerous configurations
such as Heaven’s Furnace and Heaven’s Well virtually doom any force
trapped within them. However, dispersive and light terrains present
psychological problems, for the men are not united nor inclined to fight.
154 Most of the military writings warn against the debilitating influence
of rumors and omens. In “Nine Terrains” Sun-tzu advised: “Prohibit
omens, eliminate doubt so that they will die without other thoughts.”
Similar expressions are found in Book 2 of the Three Strategies of
Huang Shih-kung; Book 3 of Questions and Replies; and chapter 1,
“Heavenly Offices,” in the Wei Liao-tzu.
155 A shadowy figure who lived in the fourth century B.C., and to whom
the Shen-tzu is nominally attributed.
156 Among the best are Wang Pang-hsiung, Han Fei-tzu te che-hsüeh
(Tung-ta t’u-shu, Taipei, 1977), pp. 165-79; Hsieh Yün-fei, Han Fei-tzu
hsi-lun (Tung-ta t’u-shu, Taipei, 1980), pp. 95-100; and Wu Hsiu-ying,
Han Fei-tzu chiu-i (Wen-shih-che ch’u-pan-she), pp. 86-91. Roger Ames
essentially initiated the study of shih as a primary, discrete concept with
a lengthy chapter in The Art of Rulership (University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, 1983), pp. 65-107, entitled “SHIH (Strategic
Advantage/Political Purchase).”
157 The development of private books may have largely coincided with
the rise of specialist military studies. See, for example, Yates, “New
Light,” pp. 218-19, and the discussion on the authenticity of the Art of
War at the end of the introduction. For general background—although
military books are not discussed—consult Burton Watson’s early work
Early Chinese Literature (Columbia University Press, New York, 1962);
T. H. Tsien, Written on Bamboo and Silk (University of Chicago Press,
1962); and Science and Civilisation in China: Chemistry and Chemical
Technology , vol. 5, part 1, Paper and Printing (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, England, 1985).
158 Giles (see note 2, above) tends to be severely criticized for his
mistranslation and misunderstanding of the Art of War, although not
always justifiably. His English equivalents for shih include
“circumstances,” “energy,” “latent energy,” “combined energy,” “shape”
(where the usage is synonymous with hsing, “shape” or “form”), and
“strength,” as well as simply eliding the term by not translating it. None
of them seem particularly appropriate, although “latent energy”
characterizes situational potential more accurately in several contexts.
   General Griffith, a highly qualified military officer with extensive
wartime experience and expert knowledge of strategy and tactics as well
as their conceptions and precise vocabulary, also employs a number of
distinct, context-dependent terms. (Note that he is generally criticized by
D. C. Lau for lacking consistency in his terminology, but the sense of
this term definitely varies within the Art of War. In a rather critical
review of Griffith’s translation, Lau discusses several of the main ideas
and problems of the text. See “Some Notes on the Sun Tzu,” BSOAS 28
(1965): 317-35. Lau’s views, while preliminary, are important to
understanding the text, and are taken into account in the translation.)
These include “circumstances,” “situation” (including at least once
where it seems highly inappropriate), “momentum,” “strength,” and
“tactical power” (which merits serious consideration as an equivalent for
shih). He also offers a valuable footnote to the title of the fifth chapter:
“Shih, the title of this chapter, means ‘force,’ ‘influence, ’ ‘authority,’
‘energy.’ The commentators take it to mean ‘energy’ or ‘potential’ in
some contexts and ‘situation’ in others” (Art of War, p. 90). In contrast,
for his recent translation (see note 4) Cleary selected “force of
momentum,” “formation,” “conditions,” and “forces.”
   The concept appears in the Book of Lord Shang and the Kuan-tzu, both
probably (for the most part) dating to somewhat after the Art of War. For
the former, Duyvendak, in The Book of Lord Shang (University of
Chicago, Chicago, 1963; reprint of 1928 ed.) translates the term as
“condition,” “power,” and “condition of power,” with the following note:
“power would really express better the sense of what is meant. Power,
that is, which relies on the general condition and trend of things, as an
abstract idea, and well distinguished from brute force” (p. 98; also see
his general discussion, pp. 97-100.) Rickett, in his new translation of the
Kuan-tzu (Guanzi, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1985), vol. 1,
employs “circumstances,” “situation,” “force of circumstances,” and
“authority derived from a specific position or situation” (see pp. 45, 58-
59). He also notes that ch’üan, discussed separately, refers to “whatever
is expedient under varying circumstances” (p. 45) and cites a passage
from the Han chi that defines the temporal nature of shih (p. 81-82).
   Other translations include (with reference to Han Fei-tzu) Graham’s
“power-base” and sometimes just “power.” He expands upon it as “a
situation of strength, or on occasional weakness, in relation to
circumstances, for example strategic position on the battlefield”
(Disputers of the Tao [Open Court, LaSalle, 1989], p. 278). Also
Christopher Rand’s “circumstantial power” (“Chinese Military Thought
and Philosophical Taoism,” p. 174); Yates, “positional advantage” (“New
Light,” p. 224.); and Burton Watson’s “advantageous circumstances”
(Hsün-Tzu: Basic Writings [Columbia University Press, New York,
1963], p. 57 and elsewhere). D. C. Lau, despite his incisive criticism,
does not offer either a definition or translation for it in his review article.
   Roger Ames’s chapter devoted to shih traces the concept’s evolution
from the military thinkers Sun-tzu and Sun Pin through its adoption by
the Legalists and into later, eclectic texts, such as the Huai Nan-tzu,
providing extensive material and careful analysis. After noting the
various meanings (and close relationship with the term for form, hsing),
he summarizes his findings as follows: “In the Sun Tzu, then, the term
shih has at least three dimensions of meaning: (1) “circumstances” or
“conditions”; (2) “physical disposition” in connection with the
deployment of troops; and (3) occupation of a superior position and
access to the potential advantages it confers” (The Art of Rulership, p.
68). Because of the apparently close connection between the concept and
the strategic advantage derived from occupation of superior positions,
Ames elects to employ the interesting, if perhaps somewhat unknown
term “purchase.” As his analysis and arguments are well documented
and readily available, it is only necessary to note that he consciously
discards “power” and “force” as too vague, believing that “shih usually
refers to something quite different from the actual strength required to
accomplish something” (page 222, note 11).
159 Chapter 5, “Strategic Military Power.” Sun-tzu also said: “The
strategic configuration of power [is visible in] the onrush of pent-up
water tumbling stones along.”
160 Verse 51.
161 Ch’i Ssu-ho, whose views are summarized in the last part of our
introduction (on the authenticity of the text), does not believe
unorthodox tactics were employed prior to, or even during, Sun-tzu’s
time—contrary to our conclusions both there and earlier in the
introduction.
162 Verse 57.
163 Much of the Questions and Replies focuses on elucidating the
complexities of the unorthodox and orthodox, providing useful insights.
The frequency of the topic throughout the Seven Military Classics
precludes meaningful expansion here. (Refer to the index of our
translation for a comprehensive listing.)
164 Chapter 4, “Military Disposition.”
165 See Hsiao T’ien-shih, Sun-tzu chan-cheng-lun (Tzu-yu ch’u-pan-
she, Taipei, 1983; reprint of 1942 ed.), pp. 197-99.
166 Cf. Hsü Wen-chu, Sun-tzu yen-chiu (Kuang-tung ch’u-pan-she,
Taipei, 1980), pp. 206-08. Hsü observes that while Sun-tzu speaks about
the mutually productive relationship of ch’i and cheng, he emphasizes
the unorthodox. Also see Kaguraoka, “Sonsi to Roshi,” especially pp.
44-46.
167 See Griffith, The Art of War, pp. 34-35.
168 See ibid., p. 42.
169 See ibid., p. 43.
170 D. C. Lau, “Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” pp. 330-31.
171 See “Two Concepts in Early Chinese Military Thought,” Language
42, no. 2 (1966): 295-99. However, see our general introduction for a
discussion on the first introduction and subsequent slow diffusion of the
cavalry in China.
172 The Art of Rulership (University of Hawaii, Honolulu, 1983), p. 68.
173 See “Chinese Military Thought,” p. 118. As Sun-tzu stated:
“[Simulated] chaos is given birth from control; [the illusion of] fear is
given birth from courage; [feigned] weakness is given birth from
strength” (chapter 5, “Strategic Military Power”).
174 For example, see the anonymous Ming dynasty work Ts’ao-lu ching-
lüeh, reprinted as Chung-kuo ping-hsüeh t’ung-lun (Li-ming, Taipei,
1986), pp. 107-10, and Hsiao T’ien-shih, Sun-tzu chan-cheng lun, pp.
197-99. In the Ming dynasty Chao Pen-hsüeh noted that very few
generals excelled at employing the unorthodox (Sun-tzu-shu chiao-chieh
yin-lei [Chung-hua shu-chü, Taipei; reprint, 1970], p. 79).
175 Several famous Sung dynasty scholars voiced skepticism: Ou-yang
Hsiu, Mei Sheng-yü, Ch’en Chen-sun, Kao Ssu-sun, and particularly Yeh
Shih, with whom the position became identified. See Ch’i Ssu-h’o, “Sun-
tzu chu-tso shih-tai k’ao” (hereafter “Sun-tzu shih-tai”), Yen-ching
hsüeh-pao, no. 26 (1939): 176.
176 The need for Nang Wa and King Chao to take concerted action
indicates the strength of the Fei clan and the growing power of the great
families in the late Spring and Autumn period.
177 In the T’ang another theory suddenly appeared that identified Sun-
tzu’s ancestors as having come from Ch’u. See Chou Wei-yen’s summary
of these possibilities, “Sun Wu ku-li Le-an tsai-chin ‘Hui-min shuo’ te-
nan ch’eng-li,” Chung-kuo-shih yen-chiu 1991: 3, p. 139.
178 WYCC, vol. 1, p. 32A.
179 Ibid., p. 41A. Note that in “The Hereditary House of Wu T’ai-po” in
the Shih-chi (chüan 31), both Po P’i and Wu Tzu-hsü are recorded as
whipping the king’s corpse.
180 See Duke Ting, fifth year, the Tso chuan. Ch’u’s leadership
experienced dissension over employing an incendiary attack against Wu
because their own dead still lay exposed in the intervening fields and
would also be burned. However, realists prevailed, arguing that if the
state proved victorious (rather than being extinguished), the spirits could
thereby continue to receive sacrifices and should be pleased. (For a
translation, see Watson, The Tso chuan, p. 187.)
181 The term “hegemonic kings” arose only late in the Warring States
period after numerous state rulers had proclaimed themselves kings. (In
the Spring and Autumn period the Chou king had retained at least
nominal royal prestige, while only the rulers of the new peripheral states
such as Wu and Yüeh had the audacity to style themselves kings.) With
this proliferation the most powerful Warring States monarchs then
sought to distinguish themselves further, giving rise to the title
“hegemonic king.” The term’s appearance in the Art of War is therefore
cited by Ch’i Ssu-ho as evidence of a late Warring States composition
date. (See “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” pp. 184-85.) Note that our translation
(chapter 11, “Nine Terrains”), however, treats the term as two individual
referents, “hegemons and true kings,” the latter being distinguished from
the former by their righteousness, because the bamboo-strip (tomb text)
edition has “wang pa”—“kings and hegemons.” (If the tomb text
preserves the original order, Ch’i Ssu-ho’s justification evaporates.)
182 WYCC, vol. 1, pp. 42B-43A.
183 Ibid., p. 46A.
184 Chapter 15, “Discussion of the Military,” Hsün-tzu chi-chieh (Shih-
chieh shu-chü, Taipei, 1974), pp. 176-77.
185 Chapter 49, “Five Vermin,” Han Fei-tzu chi-chieh (Shih-chieh shu-
chü, Taipei, 1969), p. 347.
186 See “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” pp. 179-80. Sun Pin, a descendant of Sun-
tzu, was a brilliant strategist whose achievements have been dramatically
preserved in the Shih chi and essentially corroborated by the Lin-i texts.
His work, entitled Ping-fa, is best translated as Military Methods to
distinguish it from Sun-tzu’s work of the same name. Although early
bibliographic data indicated the existence of two distinct works, Sun
Pin’s book was apparently lost by the end of the Han, and confusion
arose as to which Sun actually penned the traditonally transmitted text of
the Art of War. (A separate, otherwise unknown chapter on cavalry has
been preserved in the T’ung tien.) Numerous modern Chinese and
Japanese translations have already appeared; preliminary reports
appeared in Wen wu in 1974 with further explications thereafter, and are
largely contained in the articles cited in note 99, above.
187 For a discussion of Ssu-ma Ch’ien’s life and work, see Burton
Watson, Ssu-ma Ch’ien: Grand Historian of China (Columbia
University Press, New York, 1957). A voluminous secondary literature
on Ssu-ma Ch’ien and the Shih chi exists in Asian languages; a concise
introduction in Chinese is Liu Wei-shih, Ssu-ma Ch’ien yen-chiu (Kuo-li
pien-shih-kuan, Taipei, 1975).
188 The Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu was traditionally attributed to the reclusive
scholar Chao Yeh, who was active in the late first century A.D. nearly
two centuries after the Shih chi was written. The book contains much
material deemed extraneous by serious scholars (including reports about
spiritual swords and geomantic traditions), and it has often been
characterized as a romanticized depiction of the period, bordering on a
novel. However, Chao had an impeccable reputation as a scholar; was
known for his detailed knowledge of the period in question and the
histories of Wu and Yüeh; and is said to have dwelled in retirement for
perhaps twenty years on K’uai-chi mountain, where King Kou-chien had
fled after being thrashed by Wu in his early days. Whether he had local
records or other materials available to him cannot be completely ruled
out. However, how much of the extant work is actually by his hand and
how much is later revision—or even fabrication—especially by Yüan
dynasty commentators, is also problematic.
189 See Ch’ang Hung, “Tu Lin-i Han-chien-chung Sun Wu chuan, KK
1975: 4, pp. 210-12. Despite various claims, the fact of its preexistence
does not necessarily mean Ssu-ma Ch’ien saw this version, particularly
as it was unearthed from a private tomb rather than preserved in an
imperial library.
190 Ch’i Ssu-ho, among others, doesn’t believe Sun-tzu would have ever
been allowed to commandeer palace women to illustrate his theories of
military discipline, nor that the execution of the two captains would have
been understood as proving anything. He therefore views the entire
episode as an exaggeration. (See “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” p. 178.) Wu Ju-sung
believes the incident illustrates Sun-tzu’s fundamental teaching that a
general, once in command of the army, does not accept orders from the
ruler, rather than any lesson about discipline, in accord with his
particular understanding of Sun-tzu’s major contribution being the
isolation and characterization of the professional general (STPF CS, p.
3).
191 A few hundred soldiers from the palace guard or a similar contingent
would certainly have been more readily employed, and more likely
candidates, being accustomed to military discipline. However this would
miss the point of the entire episode—to test Sun-tzu’s theories with
people previously unexposed to such rigors. In the Shih chi it is the king
himself who inquires whether the test could be conducted with palace
women, rather than Sun-tzu boldly suggesting it. Perhaps he suggested
them precisely because they would be weak, spoiled, and, due to their
privileged position, unlikely to cooperate in such a farcical exercise.
192 Ch’ang Hung’s analysis of the fragments leads him to conclude that
the episode probably occurred, and is in fact a manifestation of the class
conflict between the old nobility and the rising economic (landlord)
class. In his view Sun-tzu was compelled to take such dramatic action in
order to impose the “rule of law” on the old nobility. See Ch’ang Hung,
“Tu Lin-i Han-chien-chung Sun Wu chuan,” pp. 211-12.
193 Ch’ang Hung draws attention to Shang Yang’s plans to have the
able-bodied women comprise one of three armies and employ them to
defend cities against invasion and siege. See Ch’ang Hung, ibid, p. 212.
This is discussed in “Military Defense” in the Book of Lord Shang,
where old men and women are also to be combined to compose another
army. These armies are kept rigorously separated so as to prevent
complex emotional effects from arising and undermining the defenders’
morale and commitment. For a translation see J. J. L. Duyvendak, The
Book of Lord Shang (University of Chicago Press, 1963; reprint of ed.),
pp. 248-52. In chapter 6 of the Wei Liao-tzu, “Tactical Balance of Power
in Defense,” there is also a reference to women defending the parapets.
(See Sawyer, Seven Military Classics, p. 253.) Finally, see the
introduction, where the role of women generals in the Shang and Eary
Chou is noted.
194 Wu Shu-p’ing, “Ts’ung Lin-i Han-mu chu-chien Wu-wen k’an Sun
Wu te Fa-chia ssu-hsiang,” WW 1975: 4, pp. 6-13.
195 A typical reconstruction following this line is found in the popular
work Chung-kuo li-tai ming-chiang, 2 vols., Ch’en Wu-t’ung and Su
Shuang-pi, eds. (Honan jen-min ch’u-pan-she, Honan, 1987), vol. 1, pp.
14-16. Its authenticity is naturally denied, being a reconstruction eight
centuries after Ssu-ma Ch’ien found himself unable to be any more
specific in tracing Sun-tzu’s lineage than identifying him as a “man of
Ch’i.” See, for example, “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” p. 189.
196 Several articles have discussed the location of the Sun family’s
original “home town.” For example, see Chou Wei-yen, “Sun Wu ku-li
Le-an tsai-chin “Hui-min shuo” te nan-ch’eng-li,” Chung-kuo-shih yen-
chiu 1991: 3, pp. 139-45; Huo Yin-chang and Wu Ju-sung, “Sun-tzu ku-
li “Hui-min shuo” pu-k’o tungyao,” Chung-kuo-shih yen-chiu 1991: 3,
pp. 146-57; Li Tsu-te, “Sun-tzu ku-li ‘Le-an’ shuo chih-i,” Chung-kuo-
shih yen-chiu 1992: 2, pp. 35-39; and Ch’en Hanp’ing, “Sun Wu ku-li
t’an-t’ao chih-i,” Chung-kuo-shih yen-chiu 1992: 2, pp. 40-51. Also see
Ch’en Chi-kang, ed., Sun-tzu hsin-t’an—Chung-wai hsüeh-che lun Sun-
tzu (Chieh-fang-chün ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1990): “Sun Wu ku-li k’ao-
i” (Wu Ju-sung, Ch’en Ping-ts’ai), pp. 245-61; “Sun Wu ku-li k’ao-ch’a”
(Wang Ping-ch’en), pp. 262-66; and “Hui-min-hsien chien-chih yen-ko
k’ao-lüeh” (Liu P’ei-jan), pp 267-71.
197 For example, see Ch’i Ssu-ho, “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” pp. 184-86. Both
subsequent historical events and later concepts are noted within the Art
of War. Among the former are references to Su Ch’in in some editions
(and the tomb text), while the development of the five-phase theory (as
now explicated by the Lin-i text entitled “The Yellow Emperor Conquers
the Red Emperor”), necessary to understand one passage, should be
counted among the latter. (See Li Ling’s excerpted comments in Hsü
Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, ed. Cheng Liang-shu, 3 vols., [Hsüeh-sheng shu-
chü, Taipei, 1984], pp. 1606-7. Also see Ch’ü Wan-li, Hsien-Ch’in wen-
shih tzu-liao k’ao-pien (Lien-ching, Taipei, 1985), pp. 433-35; and
Chang Hsin-ch’eng, Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, 2 vols. [Shang-wu yin-shu-
kuan, Taipei, 1970; reprint of 1939 ed.], vol. 2, pp. 797-801.) Other
examples are discussed below and in the notes to the translation.
198 See the notes below accompanying the summary discussion that
follows.
199 See, for example, Cheng Liang-shu’s analysis of the terms, concepts,
and passages borrowed from Sun-tzu in two relatively early works, Sun
Pin’s Military Methods and the Wei Liao-tzu, in Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao,
pp. 1617-25. A study of the actual passages quoted or otherwise
incorporated in the other Seven Military Classics requires a monograph
in itself. They are particularly extensive in the Six Secret Teachings,
although some question remains whether many of them did not also
preexist the Art of War or might have been derived from an early kernel
text of the Six Secret Teachings. These issues are considered to some
extent in our translation of the Seven Military Classics of Ancient China.
200 Wu Ju-sung, in the introduction to his Ch’ien-shuo, briefly notes
some important military events historically predating Sun-tzu (see p. 14).
A quick reading of the Tso chuan up to the conquest of Ying will also
yield numerous battles and a variety of tactics, all suggestive of
principles and concepts already well known among commanders and
military thinkers in his era. (For a convenient study, see Chu Pao-ch’ing,
Tso-shih ping-fa [Shanhsi jen-min ch’u-pan-she, 1991].) In the Art of
War Sun-tzu also quotes from now lost, preexisting military works.
201 The question of the Art of War’s placement within a fairly
continuous evolution of written styles is also the subject of debate. For
example, Li Ling (Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, pp. 1613-14) and Robin D. S.
Yates (“New Light on Ancient Chinese Military Texts: Notes on their
Nature and Evolution, and the Development of Military Specialization in
Warring States China,” T’oung Pao 74 [1988]: 218-19) view the text as
somewhat advanced over the basic verbatim, summary format of the
Analects, with some conjoined passages and a logical division of topics,
but less so than Sun Pin, and far less than Hsün-tzu and other
philosophers of the late Warring States period. They tend to note its
similarities with the Mo-tzu’s style, and Yates also believes many of the
connectives are later additions, provided in an attempt to integrate the
text. Yates suggests a date of approximately 453-403 B.C. with later
additions, while Li Ling ascribes the book to a somewhat later time,
roughly the middle of the Warring States period. (Yates also advances the
thought that the military works were perhaps the first private books to
appear in China.) However, Ch’i Ssu-ho and others, concurring with the
general view that private books did not really appear until the Warring
States period, observe that Sun Wu should have been approximately
contemporaneous with Confucius, yet the language and presentation is
more sophisticated than is characteristic of this early period. Ch’i
believes that Lord Shang and Wu Ch’i initiated the first books, followed
by Sun Pin and others, and that the Art of War represents the confluence
of Confucius’ theory of kingship, Lao-tzu’s concepts of nonaction and
unorthodox/orthodox, and Mo-tzu’s defensive strategies. He therefore
concludes it is not the work of a single person, but rather evolved over a
considerable period, being composed in the middle to late Warring States
period. (See “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” pp. 186-88.)
202 Sun-tzu extensively discusses the efforts required to mobilize a
100,000-man campaign army in chapter 2, “Waging War,” as a prelude to
asserting two main points: warfare is the greatest affair of state, and
provisions need to be seized from the enemy. The key passage runs: “If
there are a thousand four-horse chariots, a thousand leather armored
support chariots, a hundred thousand mailed troops, and provisions are
transported a thousand li, then the domestic and external campaign
expenses, the expenditures for advisors and guests, materials such as
glue and lacquer, and providing chariots and armor will be a thousand
pieces of gold per day. Only then can an army of a hundred thousand be
mobilized.” (Also note the reference to “advisors,” clearly exemplified
by Sun-tzu and Wu Tzu-hsü, but claimed by some critics as not being
found in the Spring and Autumn period.)
203 See Ch’i Ssu-ho, “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” pp. 180-82; and Li Ling in Hsü
Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, pp. 1608-10. The Wei Liao-tzu states in chapter 3:
“Who led a mass of a hundred thousand and no one under Heaven
opposed him? Duke Huan. Who led a mass of seventy thousand and no
one under Heaven opposed him? Wu Ch’i. Who led a mass of thirty
thousand and no one under Heaven opposed him? Sun-tzu.” The text
goes on to indicate army size in the middle to late Warring States period:
“Today among the armies led by commanders from the various feudal
states there is not one that does not reach a mass of two hundred
thousand men.” Duke Huan of Ch’i, the first hegemon, reigned from 685
to 634 B.C.; therefore most scholars discount the accuracy of a hundred-
thousand-man army, although Ch’i was a powerful military state. It
might also be remembered that the Shang dynasty purportedly had
several hundred thousand men under arms at the time of its destruction.
204 Discussed in chapter 3, “Planning Offensives.” The essential
paragraph runs: “The tactic of attacking fortified cities is adopted only
when unavoidable. Preparing large movable protective shields, armored
assault wagons, and other equipment and devices will require three
months. Building earthworks will require another three months to
complete. If the general can not overcome his impatience, but instead
launches an assault wherein his men swarm over the walls like ants, he
will kill a third of his officers and troops, and the city will still not be
taken. This is the disaster that results from attacking [fortified cities].”
The development of assault and siege equipment progressed rapidly in
the Warring States period. For a general introduction, see the works of
Robin D. S. Yates listed in the bibliography.
205 See Ch’i Ssu-ho, “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” pp. 182-84.
206 See Li Ling in Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, p. 1610. Also see Wei-shu
t’ungk’ao , vol. 2, pp. 797-801; Hsien-ch’in wen-shih tzu-liao k’ao-pien,
pp. 424-25; and Murayama Makoto, “Sonbu to Sonbin” in Chugoku no
meishō to sambō (Shinjimbutsu, Tokyo, 1991), pp. 88-91.
207 For example, see Ch’i Ssu-ho, “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” p. 184.
208 Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, p. 1612.
209 See, for example, Wu Ju-sung, STPF CS, pp. 8-12.
210 See Tsun Hsin, “Sun-tzu ping-fa te tso-che chi ch’i shih-tai,” WW
1974: 12, pp. 20-24. The Six Secret Teachings and the Wei Liao-tzu also
consider tactics for siege warfare, while Mo-tzu and his followers are
famous for developing and implementing defensive techniques, some of
which are preserved in the Mo-tzu.
211 Skeptics abound from the Sung dynasty onward. Some, based upon
Tu Fu, accused Ts’ao Ts’ao (the first known commentator) of butchering
the text; others doubted Sun-tzu’s existence, or felt the work must be a
later forgery. (See citations in note 5, above.) Their skepticism was in
part based upon the Han shu bibliographical notation of a Sun-tzu in
eighty-two pien (sections or chapters), despite the Shih chi reference to
thirteen sections, giving rise to the charges against Ts’ao Ts’ao. The
discovery of the bamboo-slip edition in the tomb at Lin-i in 1972, while
comprising only a third of the present edition, at least conclusively
proves the book existed in roughly current form early in the Han dynasty.
Ch’ü Wan-li and others therefore suggest that the thirteen-section work
had to be complete before Sun-tzu’s interview with the king of Wu, for
the king remarks upon this number, and the additional sections, if
thirteen is not an outright error, probably comprised materials such as
found at Lin-i, including further dialogues between the king and Sun-tzu.
(See Hsien-Ch’in wen-shih tzu-liao k’ao-pien, pp. 433-44. For further
fragmentary materials, including possible evidence for a sixteen-section
version of the text, see “Ta-t’ung Shang-sun-chia sai Han-chien shih-
wen,” WW 1981: 2) Later notations describe the Sun-tzu in three chüan
or rolls, indicating the difficulty of reconstructing textual lineages with
such obscure materials.
212 Cheng Liang-shu, after studying both traditional and newly
recovered materials, concludes that the Shih chi account is basically
accurate, and the Art of War was probably composed between 496 and
453 B.C. (See Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, pp. 1617-26.)
213 See, for example, Ch’i Ssu-ho, who consigns it to the late Warring
States period (Hsü Wei-shu t’ung-k’ao, pp. 1598-1605).
214 Yates, for example, accepts the view (based upon internal evidence
in comparison with historical events) that the text was composed
between 453 and 403 B.C. (See “New Light,” pp. 216-19.)
215 Ch’ang Ch’i-yün, Chung-hua wu-ch’ien-nien shih (Chung-kuo Wen-
hua Ta-hsüch, Taipei, 1961), vol. 3, p. 92. Ch’i Ssu-ho hypothetically
advances the thought that “Sun Wu” might refer to the book’s authorship
among the Sun family, the term “wu” being added to indicate someone
exceptionally skilled in the martial arts such as “employing the military.”
See Ch’i Ssu-ho, “Sun-tzu shih-tai,” p. 188.
                    Notes to the Translation


Abbreviations and basic texts


 SS AS     Amano Shizuo, Sonshi, Goshi (Meiji Shoin, Tokyo, 1972).

 SS MM     Murayama Makoto, Sonshi, Goshi 3rd. ed., (Tokuma
           Shoten, Tokyo, 1986).

 SS AY     Aasno Yuichi, Sonshi (Kodansha, Tokyo, 1986).

 SS HT     Hosokawa Toshikazu, Sonshi, Goshi (Gakken kenkyūsha,
           Tokyo, 1982).

 SS NT     Nakatani Takao, Sonshi (Kyoikusha, Tokyo 1987).

 SS TY     Tadokoro Yoshiyuki, Sonshi (Meitoku shuppansha, Tokyo,
           1970).

 ST        Wei Ju-lin, Sun-tzu chin-chu chin-i (Shang-wu yin-shu-
 CCCY      kuan, Taipei, 1972).

 ST SCC    Sun-tzu shih-chia-chu (Shih-chieh shu-chü, Taipei, 1984).

 ST        Sun-tzu in Ch’ung-k’an Wu-ching hui-chieh (Chung-chou
 WCHC      ku-chi ch’u-pan-she, Cheng-chou, 1989).

 STPF      Wu Ju-sung, Sun-tzu ping-fa ch’ien-shuo (Chieh-fang-chün
 CS        ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1983).

 STPF      Chün-k’o-yüan chan-cheng li-cheng-pu, ed., Sun-tzu ping-
 HC        fa hsin-chu (Chung-hua shu-chü, Peking, 1981).

 STPF      Chu Chün, Sun-tzu ping-fa shih-i (Hai-ch’ao ch’u-pan-she,
 SY        Peking, 1990).

 STPF      Wei Ju-lin, Sun-tzu ping-fa ta-ch’uan (Li-ming, Taipei,
 TC        1970).
 STPF        Wang Chien-tung, Sun-tzu ping-fa (Chih-yang ch’u-pan-
 WC          she, Taipei, 1989).

 SWTCC       Sun Wu-tzu chih-chieh, in Ming-pen Wu-ching Ch’i-shu
 WCCS        chih- chieh, vol. 1 (Shih-ti chiao-yü ch’u-pan-she, Taipei,
             1972).

 WYCC        Wu Yüeh ch’un-ch’iu, SPKY edition (Shih-chieh shu-chü,
             Taipei, 1967).


   Insofar as the Art of War has been the most studied of the Seven
Military Classics, numerous editions and commentaries are readily
available, with additional modern works appearing annually. Therefore,
in general only a single reference or two—if any—is provided for the
commentators’ views. Scholars with expertise in the relevant languages
can easily refer to the passages in such standard works as the Shih-chia
chu, Shih-i-chia chu, or those listed in the abbreviations at the beginning
of the notes. While notes will be added to many passages, they will not
repeat material already discussed in the introduction.
   The discovery of the Han dynasty bamboo slips (hereafter abbreviated
BS) has occasioned close scrutiny of the traditionally transmitted texts,
including the Sung/Ming Seven Military Classics edition. However,
although many contemporary scholars uncritically accept the BS as
preserving the original text of the Art of War, many questions remain. A
more balanced view is provided by Chu Chün and is cited in the notes as
appropriate. Variations in meaning caused by character differences are
also noted, but not simple differences caused by the presence or absence
of connectives or particles or minor inversions in textual order.
Furthermore, given the fragmentary nature of the text, phrases and
sentences missing in the BS are not cited unless they radically affect the
meaning. Important fragments and “lost passages” will also be cited as
appropriate.
1 “Estimations” in the sense of objectively estimating the relative
strength and weakness of oneself and the enemy for a series of factors.
Although twelve such factors are discussed in this chapter, as noted in
the translator’s introduction there are several tens of paired factors that
could be employed equally well in making such determinations.
  The character translated as “estimations”—chi—also has the meaning
“plans,” leading some to translate the title as “Initial Plans,” or “First
Plans.”
2 It is frequently assumed that the factors to be compared are the seven
enumerated several paragraphs below because the five that immediately
follow are already subsumed under “structure it according to [the
following] five factors” (cf. ST SCC, p. 2; and STPF CS, p. 30).
However, it seems clear that the “five factors” define the domain for
comparative calculations.
   Historically, some commentators did not accept the addition of
“affairs” following the world “five,” the correctness of which has been
sustained by the BS, which also lack “factors.” (Cf. Ch’en Ch’i-t’ien,
Sun-tzu ping-fa chiao-shih [Chung-hua shu-chü, Taipei, 1955], p. 65.)
Chu Chün (STPF SY, pp. 2-3) believes “factors” should not be excised,
despite its absence in the BS.)
3 Not the metaphysical Tao of the Taoists but the Tao of government,
understood as legal and administrative measures and policies. Liu Yin
(SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 2A) understands it in terms of the usual array
of Confucian virtues. However, Kuan Feng has observed that the concept
is never made explicit in the Art of War. See Kuan Feng, “Sun-tzu chün-
shih che-hsüeh ssu-hsiang yen-chiu,” Che-hsüeh yen-chiu, no. 2 (1957):
p. 72.
4 The character translated as “ruler”—shang—may also be understood as
“superiors,” and the commentators espouse both possibilities. Although
Liu Yin is somewhat ambivalent (SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 2A), the
translation follows STPF CS, p. 30; and SS AS, p. 26.
5 “Thus” is added from the bamboo slips, although it is implied in any
case. The BS conclude the sentence with the phrase “the people will not
deceive /contravene him” rather than the traditional “not fear danger.”
However, Chu Chün believes the traditional reading is preferable (STPF
SY, p. 3). Note that the term “deceive” also occurs in the famous
sentence somewhat later: “Warfare is the Tao of deception.”
   Commentators who stress the Legalism in Sun-tzu’s thought
understand the sentence as “they will die for him, they will live for him.”
They especially cite Sun-tzu’s directive to the commanding general to
manipulate his troops in combat like sheep, keeping them ignorant (cf.
STPF CS, pp. 30-34). Although Sun-tzu does not advocate positive
measures directed to fostering the people’s welfare—such as are found in
the other Military Classics—he does discuss gaining the allegiance of the
masses before they can be employed, not impoverishing them, and the
importance of benevolence in a commander. Most scholars thus have
understood the ideal as being exemplified historically by King Wu of the
Chou, who had garnered the willing support of the people. (For further
discussion, see Wu Shu-p’ing, “Ts’ung Lin-i Han-mu chu-chien Wu-wen
k’an Sun Wu te Fa-chia ssu-hsiang,” WW, 1975: 4, pp. 6-13.)
6 The BS add: “according with and going contrary to, [the basis of]
victory in warfare.” Neither STPF CS nor STPF SY includes it. (STPF
HC, p. 150.)
7 Terrain classification is one of the keystones of Sun-tzu’s strategic
analysis, as will become clear from the extensive materials in Chapters
eight, ten, and eleven (where these terms are further defined). His
insights were studied and expanded by Sun Pin as well as many later
thinkers.
   The BS add “high or low” at the start of the classifications (STPF SY,
p. 3).
8
   These terms are variously understood by the commentators. “The Tao
of command” may refer to the exercise of command or to the
establishment of military hierarchy, the chain of command.
“Management of logistics” probably encompasses everything from the
types and nature of the army’s equipment to the provision and
management of that equipment in campaigns. (For summaries, see SS
AS, p. 27; STPF SY, pp. 9-10; and ST SCC, p. 8.)
   Wu Ju-sung also equates the “laws” with the last four items in the
series of questions for comparative evaluation: the implementation of
laws and orders, strong forces, well-trained officers and troops, and clear
rewards and punishments (See STPF CS pp. 37-38.
9 “Forces” could also be translated as “weapons and masses” rather than
understood as “army masses” or “infantry and masses.” However,
“masses” emphasizes the contrast with the next criterion for evaluation,
the trained “officers and troops” (cf. STPF SY, p. 11; STPF CS, p. 30).
10 Ch’en Hao early interpreted this passage as referring to Sun Wu
himself staying or leaving, rather than retaining or dismissing a general.
In addition, he identifies the “general” as the king of Wu, because he
frequently commanded the army himself, and interprets Sun-tzu’s
statement as a barb to gain employment (SWT SCC, pp. 11-12. Cf. SS
AS, p. 34). However, “retaining him” as a translation seems more
reasonable than the sense of remaining with him.
   Liu Yin (SWTCC WCCS, I:6B) makes an odd distinction between the
first “general” in the sentence, which he believes refers to the Grand
General in his consultations with the ruler, and the second general, which
he sees as referring to any subordinate general appointed to implement
the chosen strategy (also see STPF SY, p. 12).
11 Liu Yin believes this should refer to the subordinate generals
entrusted with field command, “listening to the estimations” and
resulting plans (SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 6), but others believe it refers
to the king of Wu—the “you” in the translation (cf. SS AS, p. 35; ST
SCC, p. 12). Shih is discussed in the introductory notes.
12 This is also understood as “outside the normal realm of tactics,” using
the unorthodox (cf. ST SCC, p. 12; SS AS, p. 36).
13 The imbalance of power should be created with the objective of
facilitating and attaining the “gains to be realized.” Merely creating an
imbalance of power would be pointless, and such an imbalance is already
inherently dependent on the advantages one possesses (cf. STPF SY, pp.
13-14, for a similar view and an example). Ch’üan is discussed in the
introductory notes.
14 The term “deception” here inadequately conveys both the positive and
negative aspects of the matter. We prefer to translate as “deception and
artifice” because much craft is involved in not only concealing
appearance, which is the simplest form of deception, but also in creating
false impressions. Although all the military writings exploit deceit and
deception, Sun-tzu’s statement is the most explicit formulation of the
principle.
   The fourteen sentences that follow should be understood as tactical
principles flowing from this realization. They are also believed to reflect
or to be a distillation of tactical experience gained through combat
situations in the Spring and Autumn period (STPF CS, pp. 39-40). Many
have already been analyzed in the introductory overview on the conflict
between Wu and Ch’u.
15 Translators often take this as “when you are nearby make it appear as
if you are distant,” but this would clearly be contrary to reality. It would
be impossible for the enemy not to know—through reconnaissance and
observation—an army’s actual position, although attempts were initiated
routinely to diminish the accuracy of such perceptions (such as by
dragging brush and increasing or reducing the number of cook fires at
night). More likely the position to which the army is about to move, an
objective that is about to be attacked, is intended as translated (following
Liu Yin, SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 9A. Compare ST SCC, p. 14). Chu
Chün notes this might also be understood temporally, as immediate
future and some distant time (STPF SY, p. 14).
16 Two readings of these laconic sentences are possible. The critical
question is whether the first term in each of them and the several that
follow below should be read in the light of the Tao of Warfare and thus
as explications of craft and deception and ways to manipulate the enemy,
as Sun-tzu discusses extensively, or simply as a series of individual
items. In the latter case, it is possible that they were simply conjoined
here—rather than being the product of Sun Wu’s systematic analysis—
from preexisting rubrics about military action. It is tempting to read them
all in parallel, with the first term always describing an aspect of the
enemy and the second an action to be applied, but in our opinion the
imposition of such parallelism—which is frequently invalid even for two
phrases within a single short sentence—is too artificial.
   Accordingly, for the first sentence, one reading would be that “If the
enemy [desires] profit, entice them”—understanding “with the prospect
of profit,” which is somewhat redundant. The translation emphasizes the
active approach because we should assume that armies will generally
move for tactical advantage. At the same time we must remember that a
frequently discussed (and readily exploitable) flaw in some commanding
generals is greed.
   For the second sentence, two additional renderings are variously
suggested: “If they are disordered, seize them,” and “Show [apparent]
disorder [in your own forces] and seize them.” The commentators cite a
number of historical examples in support of the latter, but the former has
adherents as well, and decisive evidence for a definitive reading is
lacking. (Measures such as enticing them with profits, sowing rumors,
and fostering their licentiousness would all cause the sort of disorder that
could easily be capitalized on.) The translation follows Liu Yin.
(SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 9B. Cf. ST SCC, p. 15. Also note the
extensive analysis, with examples of these and the following sentences,
in Tzu Yü-ch’iu, ed., Mou-lüeh k’u [Lan-t’ien ch’u-pan-she, Peking,
1990], pp. 70-76.)
   The term “take them” is said to indicate an easy victory rather than a
difficult conflict (cf. ST SCC, p. 15).
17 The “substantial” and the “vacuous” (or empty) form a correlative
pair that is closely identified with Sun-tzu’s thought, although the terms
may have predated him. One of his fundamental principles is exploiting
voids, weaknesses, fissures, and vacuities. The opposite, the
“substantial” (shih)—corresponding roughly to strong, well-organized,
disciplined, expertly commanded, entrenched forces—is generally to be
avoided rather than attacked with ineffectual and wasteful frontal
assaults. (Wang Chien-tung, STPF WC, p. 31, notes the phrase can also
be understood as “be substantial and prepare for them,” although this
appears less appropriate.) The theme of chapter 6 is “Vacuity and
Substance.”
18 The military thinkers generally advocate fostering and exploiting
anger because it blinds the general to the realities of the battlefield and
takes away the troops’ judgment. Consequently, suggestions that jao
means “avoid them” are probably not accurate, even though Sun-tzu
does recommend avoiding an army when it is at the peak of its fervor.
(An alternative translation would be ‘anger and perturb them.”)
However, note that in chapter 2 Sun-tzu also states, “what [motivates
men] to slay the enemy is anger.”
19 Again, two readings are possible, the alternative being “if they are
humble /lowly, make them arrogant” (cf. Tau, ed., Mou-lüeh k’u, pp. 71-
73; STPF SY, p. 15). The translation follows Liu Yin, SWTCC WCCS,
vol. 1, pp. 10B-11A. Logically, if they are “humble” they already lack
combative spirit, and it would be foolish to raise their anger to no
purpose. (On the other hand, they may also simply be restrained and
composed.)
20 The text appears to suggest the general cannot transmit or divulge his
determinations with regard to these factors before the battle. However, it
may also entail the idea that they cannot be rigidly or arbitrarily
determined before the situation develops. Commentators embrace both
views (cf. ST SCC, pp. 20-21; STPF CS, p. 31).
21 The procedure for strategic analysis in the ancestral temple apparently
assigned relative values to the various factors, including those discussed
in this chapter. D. C. Lau (see “Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” pp. 331-32)
suggests that counting sticks were used for each factor and then the totals
taken. Some form of relative weighing was probably used because
certain factors would be more significant than others, and a simple total
is probably misleading. (The translation follows Liu Yin. Also compare
STPF CS, p. 31; Ch’en’s Chiao-shih, pp. 72-73; Kuan Feng’s comments
on the various factors in “Sun-tzu chün-shih che-hsüeh ssu-hsiang yen-
chiu,” pp. 71-75; and Yü Tse-min, “Shih-hsi Chung-kuo ku-tai te chan-
lüeh, kai-nien,” in Ping-chia shih-yüan ed. Chün-shih Li-shih Yen-chiu-
hui [Chün-shih k’o-hsüeh ch’u-pan-she, Peking, 1990], vol. 2, pp. 221-
26.) Giles errs in understanding “no points” as simply failing to perform
any strategic calculations.
22 D. C. Lau (“Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” pp. 321-25) has pointed out
that initial phrases in Sun-tzu passages are often captions or summaries.
The five-character phrase introducing this section appears to be one of
these; however, others are less clear. Traditionally, such introductory
captions have simply been made the subject of a sentence, understanding
a term such as “requires” to bridge the subject and its expansion (cf. ST
CCCY, p. 86; STPF WC, p. 52; and STPF CS, p. 42). Our translations
generally adopt Lau’s insight wherever captions apparently precede
material of any length.
23 Sun-tzu refers to “leather-armored” support chariots, and it is
commonly assumed that leather was the main component for armoring
chariots, being flexible and easily made to conform to the desired shape.
Multiple layers of lacquer would further protect the already toughened
hides, preserving them from the ravages of weather. At the start of the
Wu-tzu Wu Ch’i observes to Marquis Wen: “Your leather armored
chariots block the doors; their wheels are covered and the hubs
protected.” However, when Nang Wa (previously discussed in the
introduction) decided precipitously to change his course of action, it was
in part because Wu’s chariots were wood, while their own chariots used
leather and were therefore thought to be in danger of deteriorating from
the dampness of the wetland area. (The Tso chuan, Duke Ting, fourth
year: “Hei, of Wu-ch’eng, addressed Tzuch’ang, ‘Wu employs wood, but
we use leather so we can not long endure. It would be better to quickly
engage in battle.’”)
24 Griffith (The Art of War, p. 73) and some modern Chinese editions
(such as STPF WC, p. 53) insert a character meaning “to value” or
“esteem” in this sentence, citing (in Griffith’s case) the Seven Military
Classics edition. However, neither the latter nor the ST SCC edition
contains it; Liu Yin merely uses it in his commentary explaining the
passage (cf. SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 15A; and ST SCC, p. 23). The
Ssu-ma Fa observes: “In general, in battle one endures through strength,
and gains victory through spirit. One can endure with a solid defense, but
will achieve victory through being endangered. When the heart’s
foundation is solid, a new surge of ch’i will bring victory. With armor
one is secure; with weapons one attains victory.” (“Strict Positions,” pp.
138-39.)
25 This and similar sentences, as discussed in the translator’s
introduction, are cited as evidence for the undeveloped state of offensive
and siege warfare and the relative economic unimportance of cities.
26 Extensive military campaigns invariably create a vacuum that can be
readily exploited. Yüeh and Ch’in capitalized upon Wu’s “vacuity” when
Ho-lü’s forces penetrated Ch’u’s interior as far as Ying, and Yüeh later
struck when King Fu-ch’ai ventured north to Yellow Pond (as discussed
in the introduction).
27 It was frequently asserted that any state that constantly engaged in
warfare would simply exhaust itself and, irrespective of its victorious
record, ultimately be vanquished. Wu Ch’i said: “Now being victorious
in battle is easy, but preserving the results of victory is difficult. Thus it
is said that among the states under Heaven that engage in warfare, those
that garner five victories will meet with disaster; those with four
victories will be exhausted; those with three victories will become
hegemons; those with two victories will be kings; and those with one
victory will become emperors. For this reason those who have conquered
the world through numerous victories are extremely rare, while those
who thereby perished are many” (“Planning for the State,” Wu-tzu, p.
208).
28 This sentence has various interpretations. Generally, it is agreed that
the campaign should be won with only a single mobilization and
conscription, which would be reasonably possible given the nature and
still-limited scope of warfare in Sun-tzu’s era (cf. STPF SY, pp. 27-28).
Not transporting provisions a third time is understood in two distinct
ways: The army is provisioned only once—when about to depart—and
thereafter it must plunder and forage, securing provisions on the march
and in the field. Moreover, when the troops return they are not
reprovisioned (cf. SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 16B). A second, more
common, and more logical interpretation holds that they are provisioned
at the commencement of the campaign and supplied again on returning
after recrossing the state’s borders but must fend for themselves when in
the field (cf. ST SCC, pp. 26-27; and SS AS, p. 54).
29 As noted in the general introduction, in the Early Chou period the
“hundred surnames” were essentially the members of the aristocracy, the
free men. As time passed and their status declined, they lost their
privileged status and became the common people. The usage of the term
in Sun-tzu reflects a period when the earlier meaning was becoming
eclipsed but the term was probably not yet simply equivalent to
“common people.” From the context it is apparent that the hundred
surnames farm the land, have the material wealth to pay taxes, and have
the leisure to fulfill military obligations. Because the Art of War
specifically uses this term, it is distinguished from terms that mean “the
people” or the “common people” in the translation.
30 The bamboo slips have “market” for “army,” with the phrase reading
“the market nearby” (“the army” then being understood).
31 Military expeditions thus impose heavy direct and indirect burdens on
the populace. Under the military taxation system (imposed in varying
degrees and different forms) in Sun-tzu’s era, hamlets and villages—
depending on their classification, acreage tilled, and population—had to
provide men to serve in the military effort and furnish weapons,
equipment, and draft animals. If they could not obtain the weapons and
supplies from their own inventory or stock, they had to be purchased.
Moreover, the cost of such items for the village’s own use concurrently
escalated, depleting everyone’s financial resources. Thus wartime
inflation would strike them especially hard. (For further commentary, see
Liu Yin, SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 17B; Ch’en, Chiao-shih, pp. 78-79;
and STPF WC, p. 64.)
   Most of the military writings stress the need for economic prosperity,
for attaining a high level of material welfare within the state. The Wei
Liao-tzu, written significantly later, further emphasizes the need for
markets and commerce, for by then market cities could sustain much of
the state’s military effort. (See “Martial Plans,” pp. 254-55.)
32 The BS are somewhat different, reading “They will exhaust their
strength on the central plains, while in the interior their houses will be
empty” (cf. STPF SY, p. 30). The term for “empty” is actually the much
stronger term “vacuous,” or “void.”
33 The BS have “six-tenths” rather than “seven-tenths.”
34 The term translated as “large oxen” is literally “village oxen.” The
meaning seems to have originated with the reported practice of having
each village of sixteen “well-fields” (with eight families to each of the
latter) raise one ox, which presumably remained the ruler’s property. It
would be employed for military purposes when required. This might
explain how such oxen were viewed as expenditures from the ruler’s
treasury rather than as a tax contribution from the people (cf. SWTCC
WCCS, vol. 1, p. 17B; and SS AS, p. 55).
35 While foraging on enemy terrain proved important in Wu’s
campaigns against Ch’u—and probably in every invasion in antiquity—
many of the military thinkers advised against plundering, foraging, or
allowing destructive behavior in order to minimize the resistance being
faced. As this would concomitantly increase the logistical burden, such
restraint was probably observed infrequently.
36 “Profits,” understood as profits for the state. However, the term also
means “advantage,” as in military advantage, and the sentence could
equally well be understood as “What [stimulates them] to seize
advantage from the enemy is material goods.” Wang Hsi views this
sentence as referring simply to the establishment of rewards as incentives
because “If you cause the masses to covet profits and take them for
themselves, then perhaps they will violate the constraints and [military]
discipline” (ST SCC, p. 31).
37 The translation follows Liu Yin’s commentary on the Seven Military
Classics and expresses the traditional viewpoint—namely, that
preserving the enemy’s state is the primary objective; destroying it is
only second best. This accords with Sun-tzu’s overall emphasis on
speedily wresting victory and subjugating one’s enemies without
engaging in battle if at all possible. (Modern Chinese commentators cite
the example of Germany nourishing its rancor and hatred subsequent to
World War I until militarily reasserting itself in World War II. See, for
example, STPF WC, pp. 76-83.)
   However, D. C. Lau (“Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” pp. 333-35)
argues that the sentence should be translated as “It is best to preserve
one’s own state intact; to crush the enemy’s state is only a second best.”
Although he advances a cogent argument, the traditional understanding
appears more appropriate. Whether from a Confucian, Taoist, or Legalist
perspective, the idea of gaining victory while inflicting the least amount
of damage on the enemy is generally fundamental. Except perhaps when
blindly exacting revenge, all commanders seek to minimize their own
losses while maximizing the gains that can be realized. Occupying a
thoroughly devastated state was never espoused by any ancient Chinese
military thinker, although scorched earth policies were prominently
exploited by “barbarian” tribes later in Chinese history, and mass
slaughter accompanied by wartime rampages that resulted in the
wholesale destruction of cities did characterize the late Warring States
period.
38 Unit force levels are discussed at the end of the general historical
introduction.
39 These earthworks are variously identified as mounds for overlooking
and assaulting the city and as protective walls that allow the besiegers
shielded movement outside the city’s walls, beneath potentially
withering fire (cf. STPF SY, p. 44).
40 This continues the thought of the first passage because a ruler whose
objectives include “preserving” others is more likely to be welcomed by
the populace. (It also accords with the Confucian ideal of King Wu,
previously noted.)
41 Following Liu Yin, SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, pp. 24B-25A; and SS AS,
p. 74. D. C. Lau (“Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” p. 320) believes this
sentence refers to dividing the enemy, which is equally possible.
However, with double strength, as Liu Yin (following Ts’ao Ts’ao) notes,
one can mount a frontal assault with one part to fix them and then
employ a flanking (i.e., unorthodox) attack to overwhelm them. This
understanding also seems more congruent with the next sentence, which
still allows for engaging the enemy if you are merely equal in strength.
Forcing the enemy to divide his troops is a hallmark of Sun-tzu’s
thought. By dividing one’s forces to launch a secondary front, the enemy
would be forced to respond or face the loss of his other position. Thus he
would also have to divide his forces, thereby accomplishing Sun-tzu’s
objective. (See Tu Yu’s commentary and also the divergent views in ST
SCC, p. 44, and Chu’s analysis, STPF SY, pp. 47-49. The passage is also
analyzed in Book I of Questions and Replies, where Li Ching concurs
with Ts’ao Ts’ao’s explanation of dividing into two—one force being
orthodox, one unorthodox.) The question of how to employ
disproportionate numbers—particularly when outnumbering the enemy
—is discussed in virtually every military classic. Sun Pin (particularly in
“Eight Formations” and “Ten Questions”) and Wu-tzu generally
advocate segmenting one’s forces (and later reconcentrating) to strike the
enemy more effectively. However, a fragment in Sun Pin’s chapter
“Questions of King Wei” states: “If one is double the enemy, stop and do
not move, be full and await them, only then . . . ”
42 Such as by assuming a desperate position to fight to the death or
mounting a defense when flight would be appropriate.
43 This thought is echoed in several of the military writings, suggesting
that they all postdate the rise of the profession of arms, and that tactical
thought evolved with the appearance of professional generals. The
various texts unanimously agree on the absolute need for the general to
be a man of strong character and diverse abilities.
44 Apart from differences in tactical knowledge, experience, and
viewpoint between the ruler and his commanding general, presumably
the major problem in Sun-tzu’s era would arise from communication
difficulties. It would be difficult for the ruler to have even general
knowledge of the potential battlefield and the enemy’s forces, and
impossible for him to react to an evolving situation given that the most
cryptic information would require hours to relay by signal fires (if
available), and days or weeks by other methods.
   Sun Pin’s Military Methods frequently asserts the need for the general
to be independent and free of the ruler’s interference in order to achieve
victory. The chapter entitled “Selecting the Troops” also stresses the
need for the general to be loyal, implying that by his time (a century after
Sun-tzu) generals had become more powerful than the ruler, and
therefore posed as serious a threat to the monarch’s house as to enemy
states.
45 As discussed in the translator’s introduction, Sun-tzu is writing after
the early rise of the professional commander and the increasing
estrangement of many rulers from field command. The distinction
between the forms of administration, discipline, and temperament
appropriate to the civil and the martial is more pronounced in the other
Military Classics, such as the Ssu-ma Fa. (For discussion, see the
introductory section to the translation.) However, even here Sun-tzu is
already warning of the dangers posed by inappropriately intermixing
them.
   Some editions have ssu—“direct” or “manage”—rather than t’ung
—“the same as”—which resolves a somewhat awkward passage.
However, both the Sung and Ming editions have t’ung, which can be
understood as translated. (The next sentence also contains “same as [the
civil],” which has been left untranslated because it can also be
understood as the ruler uniting the authority for the joint command in his
own hands. Cf. STPF SY, pp. 51-52; and STPF CS, p. 47. Also note the
explanations in SS AS, pp. 79-80.)
46 Doubt and disorder are generally identified in the military writings as
key opportunities for exploitation. For example, Wu-tzu said: “If the
enemy approaches in reckless disarray, unthinking; if their flags and
banners are confused and in disorder; and if their men and horses
frequently look about, then one unit can attack ten of theirs, invariably
causing them to be helpless.” (“Evaluating the Enemy,” p. 213).
47 In “Evaluating the Enemy” Wu Ch’i isolates eight circumstances in
which victory is certain and the enemy should be attacked immediately,
and six in which it should not be attacked. Other works (such as Sun
Pin’s chapter entitled “The General’s Losses”) offer similar criteria for
evaluating the possibilities of victory.
48 The BS have chih, “to know” or “to understand,” rather than
“recognizes.”
49 The BS read “Thus, in warfare, one who knows them (the enemy) and
knows himself . . . ”
50 The BS contain two versions of this chapter, the second basically
somewhat shorter than the first.
51 “Unconquerable” rather than “invincible” because the latter tends to
connote a permanence inappropriate to fluctuating battlefield conditions.
The invincible are never conquerable, whereas an army—due to its
disposition, exploitation of terrain, and other factors—may be
temporarily unconquerable.
52 The BS lack “in warfare.”
53 Contrary to our usual practice, in this case the translation is based on
the Han bamboo text rather than the traditional Seven Military Classics.
The latter has perturbed commentators because of its apparent
inconsistency with Sun-tzu’s thought and the logical development of the
paragraph. The traditional text simply reads: “If one defends then he is
[or will be] insufficient; if he attacks then he will [have] a surplus.” This
is understood by commentators such as Liu Yin to mean that one defends
because his strength is inadequate and attacks because his force is more
than abundant (cf. SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 30). However, this contorts
the grammar because it requires that the term be reversed: “If insufficient
one defends” (cf. ST SCC, p. 56; STPF CS, p. 59. Also note Chu Chün’s
balanced appraisal, STPF SY, pp. 58-59).
54 The phrase “One who excels at offense” does not appear in the BS.
The sentences would then be elided to read: “One who excels at defense
buries himself away below the lowest depths of Earth and moves from
above the greatest heights of Heaven.” There are also unimportant, minor
variations in the BS versions (cf. STPF CS, pp. 60-61; STPF SY, p. 60).
55 The pinnacle of excellence is more subtle, more spiritual than the
visible and the spectacular. Reaction should be muted because they are
confounded.
56 The BS lack “the ancients.”
57 From the two BS versions, the original sentence apparently read:
“Thus the battles of those who excelled did not have unorthodox
victories, nor fame for wisdom, nor courageous achievements of
courage” (cf. STPF CS, pp. 58-59; STPF SY, p. 60).
58 The BS have “Thus one who excels cultivates the Tao.”
59 “Tao” is variously explained by the commentators as referring to such
Confucian virtues as benevolence and righteousness—implemented to
attract the people—or the military principles essential to being
unconquerable. Cf. SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 32B; ST SCC, pp. 61-62.
60 The BS have cheng—“upright,” “to rectify,” “to regulate”—instead of
cheng—“government.” However, as Chu Chün notes, the former could
have been a loan for the latter because the two were somewhat
interchangeable at that time. He therefore rejects the emendation
suggested by the bamboo slips. The translation reflects the traditional
text, but with the character for government understood as “regulator,”
rather than following commentaries that read it as “government” and
produce a translation that reads “Therefore he is able to conquer defeated
governments” (cf. STPF CS, p. 59; STPF SY, pp. 60-61; and ST SCC,
pp. 61-62).
61 The caption for this sentence, literally “military fa,” is considered to
be a book title by Tadokoro Yoshiyuki (SSTY, p. 118) and Ch’en Ch’i-
t’ien (Chiao-shih, p. 105), translatable as the “Art of Methods.” This is
the same title as the Art of War (which is best translated as “Military
Methods,” but we have adopted the traditional rendering). Fa
encompasses the meanings of “laws” and “methods,” with the latter
more appropriate here. Rather than the title of a preexistent book or
section of a work (which is also referred to in several other military
classics), it should be understood as the fundamental methods for
warfare, the measures that then follow (cf. STPF SY, p. 61; SS AS, p.
104). In the BS only the term fa appears, but Chu Chün retains “military
methods” (STPF SY, p. 61).
62 “Measurement” is generally understood by the commentators as
referring not only to the extent and dimensions of the terrain but also its
classification according to the categories advanced in the various
chapters that follow.
63 “Estimation” is variously described as referring to types of forces
suitable for segments of the terrain, such as crossbowmen for the hills, or
the quantities of materials required to sustain the battle. All these terms
are not otherwise discussed in the Art of War, and their referents thus
remain a matter of speculation.
64 The BS add “weighing” and “the people” to the traditional text,
producing “weighing the victory of a combative people.” Although this
is accepted by Wu Ju-sung (STPF CS, p. 58), Chu Chün appears correct
in opting for the traditional text (and thereby avoiding an awkward
grammatical construction). Cf. STPF SY, p. 61.
65 As D. C. Lau has pointed out (“Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” pp. 332-
33), the use of hsing (shape, configuration) here is nearly identical to
shih (strategic power).
66 The BS merely have Shih, “Strategic Power,” for the title.
67 The terms translated as “configuration” and “designation” are hsing
—“form” or “shape”—and ming—“name.” Within the context of Sun-
tzu’s thought, the first seems to indicate the form or configuration of
forces, as in formations and standard deployments. The second appears
to refer to naming the units, designating them in some fashion—such as
by flags with specific symbols. However, the earliest commentary, which
is by the great general Ts’ao Ts’ao, equated hsing/form with flags and
ming/name with gongs and drums. Liu Yin and others extrapolate on this
thought, but some scholars—such as Tu Mu—identify hsing with
deployments and ming with flags (see SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 35; ST
SCC, pp. 66-67; STPF CS, pp. 67-68; and Wang Chien-tung’s overview,
STPF, WC, pp. 144-46). Robin D. S. Yates (“New Light,” pp. 220-22),
based on his extensive research on the Mo-tzu, believes both terms refer
to flags and that the historically and philosophically significant term
hsing-ming originates with the military thinkers. For an early discussion
of hsing-ming—often translated as “performance and title”—as well as
the issue of which character is appropriate for the term hsing, see Herrlee
G. Creel, “The Meaning of Hsing-ming,” reprinted in What is Taoism
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970), pp. 79-91.
68 For “invariably” the BS have “entirely/altogether.” (Cf. STPF CS, p.
65; and STPF SY, p. 74. Chu Chün [STPF SY] does not accept the
revision.)
   Unorthodox (ch’i) and orthodox (cheng) are discussed in the notes to
the translator’s introduction. An intriguing view is also advanced by
Kuan Feng, equating the orthodox with movements designed to realize
advantage and the unorthodox with actions that turn disadvantageous
situations into advantageous ones (See “Sun-tzu chün-shih che-hsüeh,”
pp. 81-82. There are extensive discussions of the unorthodox and
orthodox and their realization in concrete tactics throughout the military
classics, including the Six Secret Teachings (especially the chapter
entitled “The Unorthodox Army”), Wu-tzu, Sun Pin’s Military Methods,
Questions and Replies, and even the Ssu-ma Fa (although the concept
and unorthodox tactics presumably did not exist at the traditionally
ascribed time of composition).
69 See note 17 for an explanation of the vacuous and substantial.
70 The BS have “Heaven and Earth” rather than just “Heaven.”
71 The BS have “rivers and seas” or “Yellow River and the seas” rather
than the “Yangtze and Yellow rivers.”
72 The Sung and Ming editions have keng rather than fu. Although Sun-
tzu does not continue the explicit comparison, all the commentators
make it clear that the unorthodox and orthodox are mutually related just
like these further examples of cyclic phenomena (SWTCC WCCS, vol.
1, p. 36B; ST SCC, p. 69). This theme appears in Sun Pin’s text in the
last chapter, entitled “The Unorthodox and Orthodox.”
73 Although the character pien, “change,” has generally been translated
as “transformation,” we have opted to preserve the (possibly artificial)
distinction between pien (“change”) and hua (“transformation”)
throughout our translation of the Seven Military Classics. As a tentative
basis for employing “change” rather than “transformation,” it might be
observed that musical notes are not transformed in substance when
producing new sounds, only changed in effect. Similarly, the
composition of a military force is untransformed when its employment is
changed from orthodox to unorthodox. However, this is a topic that
requires further study, and an illuminating paper by Nathan Sivin should
appear coincident with the publication of this book.
74 The BS version is slightly different; it lacks the character shun but
adds another huan, so it would read: “The unorthodox and orthodox in
circle [fashion] mutually produce each other, just like an endless circle”
(cf. STPF CS, p. 65 and STPF SY, p. 75).
75 The BS lack “pent-up” or “accumulated” water. Most translators use
the term “torrent” to describe the flow, but the essential idea in the
Sung/Ming edition is that water has been restrained and has accumulated
and then—when suddenly released—flows violently, turbulently,
carrying even stones along. (This is not to deny that some very swift
currents can tumble stones, but the pent-up water image is more
appropriate to the idea of potential power unleashed and is used in many
other military writings—perhaps quoted from Sun-tzu—in this fashion.)
76 The term translated as “constraints” is chieh, commonly used to
indicate constraints or measures imposed on troops. The term lacks a
satisfactory English rendering because it encompasses the concepts of
“control,” “timing,” and “measure.” The commentators generally agree it
refers to the modulation of both time and space. Sun-tzu apparently
intends “constraints” to encompass the deliberate structuring of actions
to ensure that the timing is precise and that the impulse of strategic
power is imparted at the proper moment to the objective at a critical
position. When the target is moving, such as a bird or an enemy,
controlling action to attain this objective becomes more difficult. The
final stage should be kept short so as to minimize the enemy’s ability to
avoid the onslaught or effect countermeasures, as Sun-tzu states below.
Liu Yin notes it also refers to the control or measurement of strength so
that the objective will be reached and not missed. (SWTCC WCCS, vol.
1, p. 37B. Also see ST SCC, pp. 71-72; ST CCCY, p. 124; and SS AS,
pp. 119-20.)
77 The same term as for the “onrush” of the water, although “to attack”
is clearly assumed.
78 Literally, “short.” Whether in a temporal or spatial dimension,
briefness is synonymous with precision and effectiveness.
79 It is a basic principle in the military classics that only an army that is
thoroughly disciplined and well-trained in segmenting and reforming can
maintain order within the swirl of battle. To effect unorthodox tactics, to
create the facade of chaos, requires the greatest discipline. (This topic is
intensively discussed in the first two books of Questions and Replies.)
80 The meaning of the circular formation has stimulated voluminous
commentaries. Essentially, the army seems to be involuntarily
compressed into a circular formation and is therefore vulnerable.
However, such a formation presents no exposed points or positions yet
offers the possibility of numerous fixed deployments and the
employment of both orthodox and unorthodox tactics through unfolding.
Consequently, in some views it is chosen deliberately rather than forced
on the army to allow flexibility while creating the similitude of difficulty
and apparent defeat (cf. SWTCC WCCS. vol. 1, p. 38A; ST SCC, pp. 72-
75).
81 The translation follows Liu Yin’s commentary, understanding the
sentence as expressing some bases for practicing the art of deception
(SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 38A). However, there are other possible
frames of reference for “Chaos is given birth from control,” among them
that one’s own troops may become chaotic despite being well controlled.
This might result from overcontrol, lack of flexibility, too fragile an
organization, a shift in battlefield conditions, or laxity in maintaining
discipline and organization (cf. ST SCC, pp. 74-76; STPF SY, p. 84; SS
AS, pp. 122-23).
82 “Foundation,” following the Sung/Ming text. However, many other
texts—including the BS and the SCC—have “troops,” which most
modern commentators feel is correct. “Foundation” presumably refers to
the general’s well-disciplined, well-organized army, so indirectly it
means “forces.” (Cf. SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p. 39A; ST SCC, p. 78;
STPF SY, p. 75. Wu Ju-sung retains pen, “foundation,” and translates it
as “heavy forces.” STPF CS, p. 67.)
83 Liu Yin comments: “Thus one who excels at warfare seeks (victory)
through the certain victory of the army’s strategic power, not through
reliance on untalented men. Thus he is able to select the talented among
men and entrust them with strategic power” (SWTCC WCCS, vol. 1, p.
39B). Although many others follow Liu Yin’s thoughts, a second line of
commentary observes that by relying on strategic power, men can be
employed according to their talents in the quest for victory. Within the
context of surpassing power, even the timid will become assertive and
perform their roles—something rewards, punishments, and the laws may
not be able to accomplish. Furthermore, men will not be forced to
attempt actions they are unable to perform (cf. ST SCC, pp. 79-80; SS
AS, p. 127; STPF SY, pp. 86-87).
84 The chapter is so named because key paragraphs advance the concept
of striking and exploiting any voids or weaknesses in the enemy’s
deployment. The substantial should always be avoided rather than
confronted. (In the BS, the title characters are reversed: “Substance and
Vacuity.”)
85 Controlling others, rather than being controlled by others, is one of
Sun-tzu’s fundamental principles, and many of his tactical measures are
devoted to appropriately manipulating the enemy (as already discussed
in the introduction).
86 The Seven Military Classics edition reads “Go forth to places he will
not race to,” whereas the ST SCC edition emends the “not” to “must”
(cf. SWTCC WCCS, vol. 2, pp. 2B-3A; ST SCC, p. 87). D. C. Lau also
supplies a perceptive note on the error of this emendation (“Some Notes
on the Sun-tzu,” p. 321), but the recovered bamboo text indicates the
original reading is “must,” and collateral evidence appears in the “T’ai-
p’ing yü-lan” (hereafter TPYL) quotation. (However Chu Chün prefers
the traditional text. See STPF SY, pp. 90-91, 96.) This coheres well with
the preceding sentence, and the traditional text has been altered
accordingly. Also note that some commentators and translators would
understand the traditional sentence as “Go by way of places he will not
race to.”
87 Because this sentence does not appear in the bamboo text, some
modern commentators view it as a later, inappropriate accretion (see
STPF CS, p. 78). However, these coupled sentences are frequently
quoted in other military works and have an inherent parallelism that
tends to suggest their correctness (cf. SS AS, p. 134).
88 STPF CS, based on the BS, emends “will not attack” to “must attack”
(STPF CS, p. 73). There is also collateral evidence for this reading in the
TPYL. However, “will not attack” accords with the chapter’s trend of
thought, particularly in light of such sentences below as “When someone
excels at defense the enemy does not know where to attack” and “If I do
not want to engage in combat, even though I merely draw a line on the
ground and defend it, they will not be able to engage me in battle
because we thwart his movements.” If the defense is impregnable, the
enemy will be deterred from foolishly attacking and uselessly expending
his forces. (Cf. STPF SY, p. 91; SS AS, pp. 137-38; and ST SCC, pp. 88-
89.) Wu Ju-sung notes that tacticians of Sun-tzu’s generation valued
defense over offense, although his text accepts the BS version “must
attack” (see STPF CS, pp. 77-78).
89 Formless, “not hsing,” having no form or discernible configuration.
90 The BS have “an advance which is unresponded to” rather than
“unhampered” (or “not repulsed”).
91 There are two differences in the BS: “stopped” for “pursued” and
“distance” for “speed.” Thus it would read “To effect a retreat that
cannot be stopped, employ unreachable distance.” These are variously
accepted or rejected by modern commentators. (Cf. STPF CS, p. 73;
STPF HC, pp. 91-92; and the traditional commentaries, ST SCC, pp. 90-
91.)
92 This sentence has occasioned rather divergent views. Although the
translation reflects the chapter’s progression, another possibility is
understanding the “hsing chih” at the beginning of the sentence in a
causative sense, as causing them to betray their form (STPF SY, p. 99).
A radically different view—expressed by Liu Yin, among others—
suggests that through the employment of unorthodox and orthodox
tactics, one creates and displays a deceptive form or disposition to the
enemy while actually being formless (SWTCC WCCS, vol. 2, p. 5B).
Others simply interpret it as displaying a form to the enemy (see STPF
CS, p. 75; ST SCC, p. 93; and SS AS, p. 144).
   In the BS the sentence begins with “Thus those who excel at command
...”
93 Note that D. C. Lau also understands the sentence in this way, as do
several commentators. Cf. “Some Notes on the Sun-tzu,” pp. 329-30.
94 The BS invert the sequence of “field of battle” and “day of battle” and
also lack the character for “Assemble.”
95 The sequence of left/right and front/rear is reversed in the BS.
96 Presumably a comment directed to the king of Wu by Sun-tzu.
However, Chang Yü comments that “I” is an error for Wu, the State’s
name (which seems unlikely). SWTCC WCCS, vol. 2, p. 8A; ST SCC, p.
97.
97 The BS have “solely” or “monopolized” for “achieved.” Accordingly,
“Thus I say victory can be monopolized.”
98 Wu Ch’i suggested the following concrete method for probing an
unknown enemy: “Order some courageous men from the lower ranks to
lead some light shock troops to test him. [When the enemy responds]
they should concentrate on running off instead of trying to gain some
objective. Then analyze the enemy’s advance, whether their actions—
such as sitting and standing—are in unison and their organization well
preserved; whether when they pursue your retreat they feign being
unable to catch you, or when they perceive easy gain they pretend not to
realize it. A commander like this may be termed a ‘wise general.’ Do not
engage him in battle.” Obviously a disordered response, which Wu Ch’i
also describes, indicates a “stupid general” (“The Tao of the General,” p.
219. Essentially the same passage appears in “The Questions of King
Wei” in Sun Pin’s Military Methods).
99 Predictability means having form; therefore, repeating previously
successful tactical methods would completely contradict Sun-tzu’s
principle of being formless. Through flexibility and variation the
configuration of response attains the inexhaustible.
100 The BS have “move/moving” rather than “configuration.” Because
“configuration” is used consistently throughout the chapter, it seems
preferable.
101 The BS have “victory” rather than “configuration.”
102 Again the BS have “move” rather than “flow.” (Chu Chün, among
others, prefers the traditional text. See STPF SY, p. 93.)
103 The BS have “complete,” so the phrase would be translated as
“completed (fixed) configuration of power.”
104 The BS lack “water,” so the last part of the sentence would also
describe the army.
105 The BS only have “transform” rather than “change and transform”
and also lack “wrest victory.”
106 The BS have two characters at the end, shen yao—perhaps an
additional comment by an unknown hand with the meaning “Spiritual
Essentials.” The last sentence (about the five phases, four seasons, and
sun and moon) appears to be a later comment. Deleting it would
eliminate one of the standard justifications cited for the lateness of the
text.
107 The title does not refer to actual combat but to achieving the
conditions that make contention possible. The main themes are therefore
the considerations of rapid versus measured advance; exploitation and
